Committee on Food Allergies: Global Burden, Causes, Treatment,
Prevention, and Public Policy
Food and Nutrition Board
Health and Medicine Division
Virginia A. Stallings and Maria P. Oria, Editors
A Report of

THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, NW Washington, DC 20001

This activity was supported by federal sponsors: the Food and Drug Administration
(Contract No. HHSP233201400020B/HHSP23337025), the Food and Nutrition
Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (Grant # FS_NAS_IOM_FY2015_01),
and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases; and nonfederal spon­
sors: the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America, the Egg Nutrition Center,
Food Allergy Research and Education, the International Life Sciences Institute
North America, the International Tree Nut Council Nutrition Research & Educa­
tion Foundation, the National Dairy Council, the National Peanut Board, and the
Seafood Industry Research Fund. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recom­
mendations expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of any
organization or agency that provided support for the project.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (U.S.).
Committee on Food Allergies: Global Burden, Causes, Treatment, Prevention,
and Public Policy, author. | Stallings, Virginia A., editor. | Oria,
Maria, editor. | National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
(U.S.), issuing body.
Title: Finding a path to safety in food allergy : assessment of the global
burden, causes, prevention, management, and public policy / Committee on
Food Allergies: Global Burden, Causes, Treatment, Prevention, and Public
Policy, Food and Nutrition Board, Health and Medicine Division ; Virginia
A. Stallings and Maria Oria, editors.
Description: Washington, DC : The National Academies Press, [2016] | Includes
bibliographical references.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016052811| ISBN 9780309450317 (pbk.) | ISBN 0309450314
(pbk.) | ISBN 9780309450324 (pdf)
Subjects: | MESH: Food Hypersensitivity—prevention & control | Food
Hypersensitivity—etiology | Food Hypersensitivity—epidemiology | Health Policy
Classification: LCC RC596 | NLM WD 310 | DDC 616.97/5—dc23 LC record
available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016052811
Digital Object Identifier: 10.17226/23658
Additional copies of this publication are available for sale from the National Acad­
emies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624­
6242 or (202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2017 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested Citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
2017. Finding a path to safety in food allergy: Assessment of the global burden,
causes, prevention, management, and public policy. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/23658.

The National Academy of Sciences was established in 1863 by an Act of Congress,
signed by President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution to advise
the nation on issues related to science and technology. Members are elected
by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Marcia McNutt is
president.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering to
advising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contributions to engineering. Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president.
The National Academy of Medicine (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was
established in 1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to
advise the nation on medical and health issues. Members are elected by their
peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau
is president.
The three Academies work together as the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine to provide independent, objective analysis and advice to
the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform
public policy decisions. The National Academies also encourage education and
research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase public
understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine.
Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
at www.national-academies.org.

Reports document the evidence-based consensus of an authoring committee of
experts. Reports typically include findings, conclusions, and recommendations
based on information gathered by the committee and committee deliberations.
Reports are peer reviewed and are approved by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
Proceedings chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, symposium, or other convening event. The statements and opinions contained in
proceedings are those of the participants and have not been endorsed by other
participants, the planning committee, or the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine.
For information about other products and activities of the National Academies,
please visit nationalacademies.org/whatwedo.

COMMITTEE ON FOOD ALLERGIES: GLOBAL BURDEN,
CAUSES, TREATMENT, PREVENTION, AND PUBLIC POLICY
VIRGINIA A. STALLINGS (Chair), Professor of Pediatrics, Perlman
School of Medicine, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
KATRINA ALLEN, Professor, University of Melbourne, and Director,
Centre of Food and Allergy Research, Murdoch Children’s Research
Institute
A. WESLEY BURKS, Curnen Distinguished Professor, Executive Dean,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine
NANCY R. COOK, Professor, Division of Preventive Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School
SHARON M. DONOVAN, Professor and Melissa M. Noel
Endowed Chair in Nutrition and Health, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign
STEPHEN J. GALLI, Mary Hewitt Loveless, M.D. Professor, Stanford
University School of Medicine
BERNARD GUYER, Zanvyl Kreiger Professor of Children’s Health
Emeritus, Johns Hopkins University
GIDEON LACK, Head of the Clinical Academic Paediatric Allergy Service,
King’s College London Guy’s & St. Thomas’ National Health Service
Foundation Trust
ANN S. MASTEN, Regents Professor, Irving B. Harris Professor of Child
Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
JOSE M. ORDOVAS, Senior Scientist and Director, Nutrition and
Genomics Laboratory, Tufts University
HUGH A. SAMPSON, Kurt Hirschhorn Professor of Pediatrics, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
SCOTT H. SICHERER, Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Professor of Pediatrics,
Allergy and Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
ANNA MARIA SIEGA-RIZ, Professor, Departments of Public Health
Sciences and Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Virginia School
of Medicine
STEPHEN L. TAYLOR, Co-Director, Food Allergy Research and Resource
Program, University of Nebraska–Lincoln
XIAOBIN WANG, Zanvyl Krieger Professor, Department of Population,
Family and Reproductive Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health

v

Study Staff
MARIA ORIA, Study Director
ALICE VOROSMARTI, Research Associate
ANNA BURY, Research Assistant (through April 2016)
KYRA CAPPELUCCI, Senior Program Assistant (through March 2016)
NOA NIR, Senior Program Assistant (from March 2016)
ANN YAKTINE, Board Director, Food and Nutrition Board
KIMBER BOGARD, Board Director (through July 2015), Board on
Children, Youth, and Families
Consultant
ANNE RODGERS, Science Writer

vi

Reviewers

This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of this
independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will
assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible
and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments
and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the
deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their
review of this report:
David B. Allison, University of Alabama at Birmingham
Dianne E Campbell, The University of Sydney
Rene W. R. Crevel, Unilever
Ruchi S. Gupta, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago
Peter Barton Hutt, Covington & Burling LLP
Robert P. Kelch, University of Michigan
Anita Kozyrskyj, University of Alberta
Richard M. Lerner, Tufts University
Rachel L. Miller, Columbia University Medical Center
Kevin Sauer, Kansas State University
Patrick Stover, Cornell University
Carina Venter, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital
Robert Wood, The Johns Hopkins Hospital

vii

viii

REVIEWERS

Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions
or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before
its release. The review of this report was overseen by Robert S. Lawrence,
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, and Huda Akil, Uni­
versity of Michigan. They were responsible for making certain that an
independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with
institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully con­
sidered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with
the authoring committee and the institution.

Preface

As pediatricians in training, we learned about life-threatening ana­
phylaxis and that prompt, appropriate treatment with a simple drug, epi­
nephrine, saves lives. We mostly worried about anaphylaxis triggered by
an undiagnosed drug allergy, or maybe by multiple bee stings. Food allergy
was not well appreciated and was confused in our minds and those of
parents with food intolerance, food sensitivity, and family reports of food
reactions. Prevention of severe allergic reactions from peanut exposure in
schools and airplanes was not discussed.
Food allergy is a complicated, multifactorial disease whose causes,
mechanisms, and effects are not yet fully understood. The evidence on the
true prevalence of food allergy is obscured by insufficient or inconsistent
data and variable methodology. Despite these obstacles, public concern has
grown in response to the apparent rising global prevalence of food aller­
gies, and many health care experts who provide care to patients agree that
any real increase in food allergies that has occurred is unlikely to be due
simply to an increase in awareness. Numerous stakeholders are concerned
about this rise in food allergies, including the general public, policy makers,
regulatory agencies, the food industry, scientists, clinicians, and especially
families of children and young people suffering from food-related allergies.
This consensus study is the result of a planning meeting that was
held by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in
response to broad public interest in the health aspects of food allergy, the
relevance to public health, health care, and society, and the current lack of
solutions both for preventing and managing food allergies. The goal of this
consensus study is to review the science and management practices of food
ix

x

PREFACE

allergies. Our committee intends that this report will clarify the nature of
the disease, its causes, and its current management; highlight gaps in knowl­
edge; encourage the implementation of food allergy management tools at
many levels and among many stakeholders; and delineate a roadmap to
safety for those who have, or are at risk of developing, food allergies, as
well as for others in society who are responsible for public health.
This committee had the unique opportunity to hear directly from an
advisory panel made up of nine parents of children with food allergies
and one individual with food allergy. Members of the advisory panel were
invaluable to the committee as meaningful examples of the sentiments and
struggles of living with food allergies. We heard about the anxiety they feel
in restaurants, schools, airplanes, and other settings where they are fearful
about unintentional exposure to a food that can cause a life-threatening
allergic reaction. The advisory panel asked for clear and consistent guide­
lines for diagnosing and managing food allergies and for treating reactions.
We also heard their desire for more clarity in food labeling, appropriate
training for emergency personnel, and greater access to epinephrine. And
we heard their plea for a roadmap to safety so that people with food allergy
and their family and friends can participate fully in the world without the
fear of a severe or fatal food allergy reaction.
Drawing on insights from the advisory panel, as well as expert testi­
mony, comprehensive literature reviews, committee expertise and delibera­
tions, the committee recognized that preventing and treating food allergy
and creating a roadmap to safety is a multifaceted undertaking that must
take into account many interacting systems that influence both risks and
safety over the life course. To address this, the committee decided that this
report would benefit from taking an ecological and developmental perspec­
tive. This ecological-developmental model emphasizes the importance of
developmental timing for food allergy exposures and for safety planning.
The committee used this approach to delineate the issues, organize the
evidence, draw conclusions, make recommendations, and communicate
conclusions. The committee recognized that many sectors at multiple levels
of organization in private and public life must be considered to understand
and protect the individuals from the risks posed by food allergies.
The current paradigm of prevention and treatment is changing. As this
report was being written, new evidence on the potential benefits of early
introduction of allergens was emerging to dismantle previous views about
the benefits of delaying introduction of allergens until 1 year of age or even
later. These new studies are causing leading organizations to rethink the cur­
rent recommendations and consider promising new prevention approaches.
Understandably, these changes can lead to confusion among those at risk
of food allergy and even among health care providers.
Thoughtful policies at many different levels, including guidelines and

PREFACE

xi

regulations, can help protect public health. Although many nongovernmen­
tal organizations and governments provide tools, guidelines, and policies
to promote greater safety in various settings (e.g., food industry practices,
regulatory agencies, child care settings, schools, higher education, and pub­
lic transport), their implementation and enforcement varies greatly across
the United States. Moreover, policies and guidelines may not be keeping
pace with the science.
This report is meant to be a review of scientific questions. In addition,
this report reviews some of the management approaches that are in place
to improve health and quality of life for individuals with food allergy and
their caregivers. Finally, the committee envisions that this report will serve
as a tool for all the stakeholders and the public to recognize the importance
of this disease as well as to join forces in efforts to improve markedly our
ability to understand, effectively manage, and ultimately cure food allergy,
and to make the world safer for those afflicted with this disease.
The committee responsible for the report is varied in expertise, with
members chosen for their experience in allergic diseases, immunology, pedi­
atric medicine, epidemiology, genetics, epigenetics, public health, nutrition,
food science, and the food industry. The chapters are authored jointly by
committee members, who contributed their expertise to appropriate areas,
subject to review and comment from the entire committee. Committee
members volunteered countless hours to long but productive days of meet­
ings in Washington, DC, and to research, deliberations, and preparation
of the report. Many other people contributed significant time and effort
to support the preparation of the report during open committee sessions
and through presentations at a workshop. We are grateful for their efforts.
The committee could not have done its work without the initiative
and collaboration from the Board on Children, Youth, and Families and
superb guidance and support provided by the Food and Nutrition Board
staff: Maria Oria, Study Director; Alice Vorosmarti, Research Associate;
Anna Bury, Research Assistant; and Kyra Cappelucci and Noa Nir, Senior
Program Assistants. The committee also benefited from the overall guidance
of Ann Yaktine, Director of the Food and Nutrition Board. The committee
is also especially thankful to Anne Rodgers, who edited this report.
Lastly, as chair, I express my sincere appreciation to each member of
this committee and staff for their extraordinary commitment to the project
and to the wonderful opportunity to work with them on this important
task to improve the health and future of people around the world with
food allergy.
Virginia Stallings, Chair
Committee on Food Allergies:
Global Burden, Causes, Treatment, Prevention, and Public Policy

Contents

SUMMARY

1

1

INTRODUCTION

19

2

DEFINITIONS

39

3

PREVALENCE

59

4

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE
MONITORING, AND PROGNOSIS

97

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL
DETERMINANTS OF FOOD ALLERGY RISK AND
POSSIBLE PREVENTION STRATEGIES

139

6

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

227

7

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

277

8

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES IN RETAIL, FOOD
SERVICE, SCHOOLS, HIGHER EDUCATION, AND
TRAVEL SETTINGS

333

5

xiii

xiv
9

CONTENTS

RESEARCH NEEDS

10 FINAL COMMENTS: A ROADMAP TO SAFETY
APPENDIXES
A OPEN SESSION AGENDAS
B FOOD ALLERGY PREVALENCE LITERATURE SEARCH
STRATEGY
C RISK DETERMINANTS LITERATURE SEARCH
STRATEGY
D ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
E DEFINITIONS
F COMMITTEE MEMBERS BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES

365
379
389
397
439
541
545
553

Summary

Food allergy, an adverse health effect arising from a specific immune
response that occurs reproducibly on exposure to a given food, affects the
health and quality of life of individuals and their caregivers across a range
of dimensions. A food allergy can cause skin, respiratory, and gastroin­
testinal reactions. The quality of life of individuals with food allergy is
diminished as their social interactions and routine life activities are affected.
For some individuals, a food allergy can lead to severe allergic reactions
and death. Food allergies typically develop within the first year of life but
they can also develop later in life. Eight food groups are considered to be
major allergens. These are milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts, wheat, soy, fish, and
crustacean shellfish.
Questions persist about whether food allergy prevalence has been on
the rise within the past two decades and why. The current data do not
unequivocally support the occurrence of such a rise. Multiple hypotheses
have been generated about potential genetic and environmental factors that
lead to food allergies and a potential rise in food allergy cases. Concomitant
with a widespread perception of an increase in prevalence, the public and
other stakeholders frequently misinterpret a food allergy and its symptoms,
how to differentiate a food allergy from other immune and gastrointestinal
diseases, and what effective management and prevention approaches to use.
For example, lactose intolerance symptoms can be misinterpreted as a food
allergy, when in fact their physiological origin and management approaches
are vastly different.
Food allergy is a complex disease at the molecular and cellular level
and although much research data have accumulated, many fundamental
1

2

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

questions remain. For example, researchers are struggling to identify factors
in utero and during the first year of life, such as the timing of introduc­
tion of solid foods or breastfeeding duration, that could lead to the onset
of allergies. Overall, gaps in knowledge at the mechanistic level represent
barriers to developing strategies for disease prevention and management.
Not surprisingly then, recommendations by public health authorities or
professional associations for preventing or managing a food allergy are
limited by the scarce or inconsistent research findings. Although promising
therapeutic approaches are being tested, no effective treatments currently
exist for patients with food allergies.
In the absence of approved treatments, patients are advised to avoid
the allergen, which can be very difficult, especially in some circumstances.
For example, under the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection
Act, food allergens must be listed in the ingredient list of a packaged food.
Unfortunately, during production or manufacturing, cross-contamination
may occur, resulting in the food product having a hidden allergen that does
not appear on the label. In addition, food service establishments are not
required to list food allergens, so an individual’s safety depends on clear
communication and on employees’ knowledge of the allergen content of
the food being served and on the establishment’s management practices.
Even with the most stringent management practices, accidents, such as
cross-contact events, can still occur when people with a food allergy eat
outside of the home. Concerted efforts by policy makers, industry leaders,
and others are necessary to bring about a safe environment for those with
food allergy.
In summary, many stakeholders, including policy makers, the food
industry, scientists, clinicians, and especially individuals with food allergy
and their caregivers, are concerned about the misunderstandings, and the
lack of effective treatment and clear approaches to prevent food allergy.
This report collects and evaluates the scientific evidence on the preva­
lence, origins, diagnosis, prevention, and management of food allergy and
makes recommendations to stakeholders to maximize safety and to increase
research activities related to food allergy.
THE TASK AND COMMITTEE’S INTERPRETATION
An ad hoc committee of 15 experts was selected to respond to the
statement of task (see Box S-1). The plan for the study included an advi­
sory panel made up of nine parents of children with food allergy and one
individual with food allergy. This panel was asked to present to the com­
mittee at public meetings; their testimonies were invaluable as examples of
the challenges and burden of living with food allergies.
Given the misunderstandings related to food allergy, a first assignment

3

SUMMARY

BOX S-1
Statement of Task
A committee will be formed to examine critical issues related to food allergy,
including the prevalence and severity of food allergy and its impact on affected
individuals, families, and communities; and current understanding of food allergy
as a disease, and in diagnostics, treatments, prevention, and public policy. This
consensus study will engage a broad array of stakeholders, including government
agencies, organizations, academic institutions, industries, policy makers, and
patient organization groups; to bring together leading investigators from relevant
fields, clinicians, and parents; and to develop a framework for future work; and
to recommend actions by both government and nongovernment agencies. The
committee’s review of the evidence will consider the following key questions:
1. What are current trends in food allergy prevalence?
•
What is an appropriate definition of food allergy to use in measuring
prevalence?
•
What data or methods are most appropriate to use in measuring
prevalence and how may they be implemented?
•
Should there be an effort to assess prevalence for allergens other
than the eight most common that are required to be disclosed on
food packages? If so, should the same methods be used for these
allergens?
2. What are the key prenatal/early life determinants of food allergy?
•
For example, are there dietary factors that impact development of food
allergy and are these modifiable?
3. What are the current data gaps in understanding the diagnosis and prognosis for food allergy?
•
What new approaches are being developed to address these data
gaps?
4. What steps can be taken to educate providers and the public in order to
create safe environments for food allergic children both within and outside
the home?
•
What and where are the most risky food scenarios and how can these
be better managed?
•
What guidance can be given to individuals about exposure to low
levels of allergens in food products?
5. What is the status of assessing allergen thresholds in individuals? What
additional methods or tools are needed?
6. What research gaps need to be filled in order to provide better guidance
to health care providers and policy makers?
The committee will develop a framework for future direction in understanding
food allergy and its impact on individuals, families, and communities; recommending steps to increase public awareness of food allergy; promoting research on
both disease causation and management; and informing preventive approaches
to food allergy. Research gaps will be identified and recommendations made to
fill them.

4

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

for the committee was to define the types of food allergies to address in
this report. Food allergy, as opposed to a food intolerance, which does not
have an immunologic component, arises from a specific immune response.
Food allergy has two key classifications: immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated
or non-IgE-mediated. The recommendations in this report focus on IgE­
mediated food allergies, which have better defined underlying cellular
mechanisms and physiological reactions. Other food-related diseases, such
as celiac disease, food intolerances (e.g., lactose intolerance) are not cov­
ered. However, other non-IgE-mediated food allergies are mentioned when
appropriate, particularly while discussing diagnostic methodologies. With
a focus on the United States, many recommendations could apply in other
countries.
A DEVELOPMENTAL AND ECOLOGICAL
PERSPECTIVE ON FOOD ALLERGY
For every individual, the risks and protections from food allergies
vary over the life course, depending on individual genetic factors, bio­
logical development, exposures to allergens, and the contexts in which the
individual lives (i.e., a developmental perspective). Before birth, a fetus
interacts indirectly with systems because influences (e.g., diet) are mediated
by maternal biological function. After birth, children continue to develop
and they interact directly with numerous new systems, including peers,
schools, social media, workplaces, and social contexts. But individuals are
influenced by many additional systems beyond their proximal interactions,
through cultural practices and governmental or nongovernmental policies
or rules. The safety and well-being of individuals with potential food aller­
gies, then, require recognition that risks and protections for public safety
are spread across many systems, including food production and distribu­
tion systems, health care systems, and education systems (i.e., an ecological
perspective). The committee developed a model to depict those important
interactions (see Figure S-1).
THE ROADMAP TO SAFETY
In mapping the road to greater public safety regarding food allergy, in
addition to the health care system, the committee selected the following set­
tings for their relevance to the task at hand: food establishments, early care
and education, schools, higher education, and the travel industry. These
settings vary in policies and practices, and many improvements are both
feasible and would likely contribute to preventing and managing severe
allergic reactions and improving quality of life.
The committee’s roadmap to safety is multifaceted, involving many

SUMMARY

5

FIGURE S-1 Ecological-developmental model for food allergies. Different systems
that an individual interacts with are depicted as proximal (e.g., food, biophysical
environment) and distal (e.g., industry, government).
NOTES: Industry practices refers to all the manufacturing processes and allergen
control plans followed during food production, distribution, preparation or cook­
ing, and serving. They also refer to mandatory and voluntary labeling of food al­
lergens and to recall procedures followed when a product is contaminated with a
food allergen. Cultural and societal practices refer to the particular diets and foods
of regions and countries. Biophysical environment refers to the external proximal
environment (e.g., air) while Individual refers to all systems internal to a develop­
ing human, including genome, epigenome, proteome, metabolome, central nervous
system, immune system, microbiomes, and many other self-regulatory systems in­
volved in adaptation and sustaining life. Health care providers include the persons
(e.g., physicians, dieticians) and the institutions that protect individual and public
health. Child care, school, work includes all proximal settings that interact with
an individual at different life stages. Finally, family, home refers to the system of
people, relationships, routines, and practices occurring at home. Interactions (e.g.,
communication, physical contact) occur between and among all those systems and
the individual to support (or not) food safety.

6

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

stakeholders and the following actions (see Figure S-2): (1) obtain accu­
rate prevalence estimates, (2) use proper diagnostic methods and pro­
vide evidence-based health care, (3) identify evidence-based prevention
approaches, (4) improve education and training, (5) implement improved
policies and practices to prevent the occurrence of severe reactions, and
(6) expand research programs. This section summarizes these actions and
related recommendations.
Obtain Accurate Prevalence Estimates
To prioritize food allergy as a public health concern and ensure that
adequate resources are directed at the issue, the extent of the problem must
be defined. No study in the United States has been conducted in a systematic
manner, with sufficient sample size, and in various populations to determine
the true prevalence of food allergy. Because of the low quality of data,
particularly the use of self-reported data instead of the gold standard oral
food challenge (OFC)1 method, the true prevalence of food allergy is likely
overestimated in most published studies.
The committee recommends that the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention obtain prevalence estimates on food allergy in a
systematic and statistically sound manner.
Prevalence should be assessed in a systematic fashion in a suf­
ficiently large population, with consideration given to using strati­
fied sampling for cost-efficiency, with frequency-weighting used to
obtain population-wide estimates. Prevalence estimates should be
conducted in both children and adults and in groups defined by
race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status to determine differences
in diagnosis and prevalence within these subgroups. To support
population risk assessments, the committee also recommends that
the dietary intake history of those reporting food allergy be com­
pared to those who do not, particularly for the specific foods of
interest.
Although a new study design (or the use of other data sur­
veillance systems) is possible, the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) is a feasible option to systemati­
cally examine the prevalence of food allergy by collecting data on
1 Oral food challenge is a feeding test that involves gradual, medically supervised ingestion
of increasingly larger doses of the food being tested as a possible food allergen. The test is
positive when the individual experiences food allergy symptoms, such as skin, respiratory, and
gastrointestinal reactions.

FIGURE S-2 Roadmap to food allergy safety in six actions.
* Research is needed to achieve all other actions and to reach the short- and long-term goals (see Chapter 9 for all specific areas of
research). The actors represent the primary stakeholders that will be involved in implementing the actions.

7

8

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

self-reported food allergies, food-specific immunoglobulin E con­
centrations, food-specific skin prick test results, and oral food chal­
lenge results.2 Specific suggestions for use of NHANES (or other
data surveillance systems), such as oversampling of young children
(<6 years) as an important group, are included in Chapter 3.
Use Proper Diagnostic Methods and Provide Evidence-Based Health Care
No simple diagnostic tests exist for food allergy, and the selection and
interpretation of tests depend upon the nature of the disorder and the indi­
vidual medical history. The OFC carries risk and expense and is underused.
The medical history and other test results (e.g., skin prick test) can suggest
the likelihood of a food allergy, but in some cases an OFC is needed to
confirm the presence of a clinical disease.
The committee recommends that physicians use evidence-based,
standardized procedures as the basis for food allergy diagnosis
and avoid nonstandardized and unproven procedures (e.g., applied
kinesiology, immunoglobulin G panels, electrodermal testing).
When food allergy is suspected, a patient should be evaluated by a
physician who has the training and experience to select and inter­
pret appropriate diagnostic tests.
Although this process often may include an initial evaluation
by a primary physician, it is important that those with suspected
food allergy be diagnosed appropriately, which is likely to involve
referral to or consultation with a physician specialist who can
diagnose, comprehensively evaluate, and manage the food allergy.
Food allergy evaluation procedures include a medical history
and physical examination, and also may include a food-specific
skin prick test, food-specific serum immunoglobulin E test, diag­
nostic food elimination diet, and OFC. Selection of the specific
tests needs to be individualized based on the medical history of
each patient. Health care providers trained in food allergy, leaders
of health care facilities, and health care payor groups can facilitate
the appropriate use of OFCs, including personnel, facilities, and
safety guards, so that physicians are not deterred from performing

2 The gold standard OFC is an expensive method and must be administered in a clinic and
under supervision of a trained physician. The testing sequence, therefore, is meant to lead to a
population sample that is enriched with individuals reporting food allergy and that minimizes
cost and effort.

9

SUMMARY

the types of diagnostic testing that are appropriate for the patient’s
diagnosis and care.
Identify Evidence-Based Prevention Approaches
Although many factors have been postulated to contribute to the onset
of food allergy, strong evidence is lacking about any association, mainly due
to methodological limitations and variations in study designs. The stron­
gest data derive from recent studies supporting the dual allergen exposure
hypothesis, which proposes that a food allergy may occur through exposure
to low doses of allergen through damaged skin (such as in eczema) followed
by oral exposure to these allergens through consumption early in infancy.
The hypothesis proposes that the practice of delaying the introduction
of allergens may have contributed to the presumptive rise in food allergy
prevalence.
The committee recommends that public health authorities and clin­
ical practice guidelines include consistent, clear, and evidence-based
advice for families and health care providers, including dietitians,
about the potential benefits of introducing allergenic foods (e.g.,
peanut products, egg, dairy, and wheat) in the first year of life to
infants, when an infant is developmentally ready (around 6 months
of age), but not before 4 months of age, particularly to those at
high risk of allergy. Guidelines also should include information
about the circumstances in which health care providers should
advise their patients about the safest way to introduce in their diet
peanut products (and/or other foods, as determined by the results
of ongoing research).
Improve Education and Training
Public Health Authorities, Health Care Providers, and Their Patients and
Caregivers
The committee generally supports current guidelines and U.S. practice
parameters for food allergy management and emphasizes those areas where
improvements would lead to significant changes in the quality of life of
patients and their caregivers, such as training and education.
The committee recommends that the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention work with other public health authorities to plan
and initiate a public health campaign for the general public, indi­
viduals with food allergy, and all relevant stakeholders to increase

10

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

awareness and empathy as well as to dispel misconceptions about
food allergy and its management.
For example, as part of that campaign and taking advantage
of the popularity of digital media among the public, particularly
children and adolescents, public health authorities could develop
effective media engagement programs. To plan for this campaign
and develop media programs, public health authorities could con­
duct formative research with all potential audiences.
The committee recommends that public health authorities, such
as the National Institutes of Health and the World Health Orga­
nization, and professional organizations, such as the American
Academy of Pediatrics; the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma
& Immunology; American Academy of Family Physicians; and the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, regularly update guidelines
on diagnosis, prevention, and management of food allergy based
on strong scientific evidence, as emerging scientific data become
available.
For example, current evidence is insufficient to associate any of
the following behaviors with prevention of food allergy: food aller­
gen avoidance diets for pregnant or lactating women, prolonged
allergen avoidance in infancy, vaginal delivery, breastfeeding, infant
formulas containing extensively or partially hydrolyzed protein,
and supplementation with specific nutrients (e.g., vitamin D, folate,
fatty acids) in children or adults.
The committee recommends that medical schools as well as resi­
dency and fellowship programs and other relevant schools include
training for health care providers in the management of food
allergy and anaphylaxis. Health care providers, including dietitians
and mental health professionals, also should receive training on
approaches to counseling patients and their caregivers. Counsel­
ing training is envisioned to be provided, in part, by professional
organizations through various means, including the Internet.
The following elements of food allergy training are appropriate
for all health care providers, including emergency medical techni­
cians, emergency room staff, nurses, dietitians, and others:
•

Emergency management. This includes training to recog­
nize and manage an anaphylaxis emergency, such as the use

11

SUMMARY

•

of intramuscular epinephrine as a first line of emergency
management for episodes of anaphylaxis.
Counseling on food allergy management and anaphylaxis.
This includes identifying food allergies as well as man­
aging and treating them in various settings (e.g., home,
school, restaurants), as well as emergency management of
anaphylaxis.

As appropriate, physicians and other health care providers also
may receive training to provide the following:
•

•

Nutrition counseling. This includes discussion of safe and
nutritionally adequate avoidance diets to individuals with
food allergies, particularly children and their caregivers.
The training also could include offering referral to a dieti­
tian when needed and as part of reimbursable care. In
addition, dietitians may receive training in providing indi­
vidualized dietary advice to people with food allergy and
their caregivers.
Psychosocial counseling. This includes identifying and dis­
cussing with patients and caregivers psychosocial concerns
(e.g., bullying), validation of feelings, and balancing man­
agement with participation in daily activities. Training also
could include offering referral to a mental health profes­
sional when needed and as part of reimbursable care. In
addition, mental health professionals may receive train­
ing in counseling individuals with food allergy and their
caregivers.

The committee recommends that health care providers counsel
patients and their caregivers on food allergy following the most
recent food allergy guidelines and emphasizing the need to take
age-appropriate responsibility for managing their food allergy.
Counseling is particularly important for those at high risk of food
allergy and severe food allergy reactions, such as adolescents,
young adults, and those with both food allergy and asthma.
The committee recommends that health care providers and others
use intramuscular epinephrine (adrenaline) in all infants, children,
and adults as a first line of emergency management for episodes
of food allergy anaphylaxis. The Food and Drug Administration
should evaluate the need for, and, if indicated, industry should

12

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

develop an auto-injector with 0.075 mg epinephrine specifically
designed for use in infants.
Current auto-injectors have 0.15 mg or 0.30 mg epinephrine,
which is not suitable for infants. Consensus is currently lacking on
first aid management using available auto-injectors when managing
infants. A dose of 0.075 mg from an auto-injector could fill this
gap. Labeling the auto-injectors in a standard manner to differenti­
ate doses also could be beneficial.
Training First Responders and First Aiders
Food anaphylaxis can occur in any setting, and proper emergency
management can be life-saving. The public, particularly first responders and
first aid personnel, need to be prepared to assist with food-related severe
reactions. Overall, food allergy anaphylaxis is not included in training cur­
ricula of organizations that offer certifications on emergency training or
specialized training for professionals, such as pediatric specialization for
early care and education providers.
The committee recommends that organizations, such as the Ameri­
can Red Cross or the National Safety Council, who provide emer­
gency training (e.g., first aid training, basic life support) to the
general public and to first responders and first aid personnel in
various professions and workplaces, include food allergy and ana­
phylaxis management in their curricula.
Training Food Industry Personnel
The committee found deficiencies in the knowledge of food indus­
try personnel, including poor communication within the establishment,
staff failure to prevent cross-contact, and lack of knowledge about hidden
ingredients.
The committee recommends that food industry leaders provide the
necessary resources for integrating food allergy training (e.g., food
allergen identification and preventive controls, effective risk com­
munication with customers) into existing general food safety and
customer service training for employees at all levels and stages in
the food industry, as appropriate, encompassing processing, retail
food and grocery stores, restaurants, and other food service venues.

13

SUMMARY

Training for employees could be offered through, for exam­
ple, supporting conferences, workshops, or webinars to share best
practices related to allergen preventive controls, food allergen risk
communication, and other food allergen safety topics. State health
departments could develop a certification process for allergy aware­
ness and management in restaurants modeled after the letter grad­
ing system that rates their food safety performance.
Implement Improved Policies and Practices to
Prevent the Occurrence of Severe Reactions
Policies Regarding Labeling of Packaged Foods
The food processing industry and the federal government have an
essential role in informing individuals at risk of food allergy about the
presence of allergens in foods. There are two types of allergen labeling: (1)
mandatory, when the allergen is added as an ingredient; (2) voluntary, when
the allergen might be inadvertently in the food as a result of cross-contact.
The list of major allergens to be labeled in food packages, which has
been adopted by many countries, has not been reviewed since it was devel­
oped by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) in 1999. Also, some
U.S. labeling policies are not effective in informing consumers about the
risks from food allergens.
In terms of voluntary labeling, unintentional allergens at levels that
could cause a reaction can be identified on the labels of packaged foods
using precautionary allergen labels (PALs) with wording such as “X may be
present.” Currently, PALs bear no relationship to risk. To improve the label­
ing of unintentional allergens, the Allergen Bureau of Australia and New
Zealand has developed the VITAL® (Voluntary Incidental Trace Allergen
Labeling) program, which is based on risk assessment principles.
The committee recommends that the Codex Alimentarius Commis­
sion and public health authorities in individual countries decide on
a periodic basis about which allergenic foods should be included
in their priority lists based on scientific and clinical evidence of
regional prevalence and severity of food allergies as well as allergen
potency.
For example, in the United States, some foods listed by the
Food and Drug Administration as tree nuts (i.e., beech nut, butter­
nut, chestnut, chinquapin, coconut, gingko nut, hickory nut, lichee
nut, pili nut, shea nut) could be removed from the current priority

14

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

list based on the paucity of data or low frequency of allergic reac­
tions. In addition, evidence of the allergy prevalence and reaction
severity to sesame seeds may warrant their inclusion on the priority
allergen list in the United States.
The committee recommends that the Food and Drug Administra­
tion makes its decisions about labeling exemptions for ingredients
derived from priority allergenic sources based on a quantitative risk
assessment framework.
A quantitative risk assessment is based on knowledge of the
detectable level of protein, its presence in the ingredient, exposure
levels to the ingredient, and threshold dose-distributions for indi­
viduals allergic to the food.
The committee recommends that the food manufacturing industry,
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the U.S. Depart­
ment of Agriculture (USDA) work cooperatively to replace the
Precautionary Allergen Labeling system for low-level allergen con­
taminants with a new risk-based labeling approach, such as the
VITAL program used in Australia and New Zealand.
To meet this risk-based approach, the following three steps are
recommended:
1. The FDA and the USDA should establish Reference Doses
(thresholds) for allergenic foods, where possible. The com­
mittee concludes that at this time, sufficient data exist on
milk, egg, peanut, certain tree nuts (i.e., cashew, walnut,
hazelnut), wheat, soybean, fish, and crustacean shellfish
(shrimp) to establish Reference Doses. The FDA and the
USDA should review the Reference Doses periodically, with
particular attention to the remaining tree nuts for which
data to establish Reference Doses are not currently avail­
able (i.e., almond, Brazil nut, macadamia nut, and pine
nut).
2. Once Reference Doses are established, a food product
would carry an advisory label (e.g., “peanut may be pres­
ent”) only in situations when ingesting the product would
expose the individual to a level above the Reference Dose
for that allergen. The FDA should restrict the number of
allowable advisory labels to one phrase. Because this label­
ing is voluntary, the product should clearly inform the

SUMMARY

15

consumer, through labeling as appropriate, as to whether
a risk-based approach (such as VITAL) has been followed
for each specific product. The FDA and the USDA should
educate health care providers and consumers about the
meaning of such a food allergy advisory statement.
3. The FDA and the USDA, together with the food industry
and the analytical testing industry, should develop and vali­
date detection methods and sampling plans for the various
food allergens for which Reference Doses are established. A
common unit of reporting also should be established, such
as parts per million of protein from the allergenic source,
so that comparisons can be made between methods and
between levels in the food and clinical threshold values.
Policies at Specific Settings
The FDA Food Code provides advice from the FDA for uniform sys­
tems and practices that address the safety of food sold in food establish­
ments. The 2013 FDA Food Code includes provisions on preventing food
allergic reactions but it has not been adopted by all states.
The committee recommends that all state, local, and tribal gov­
ernmental agencies adopt the 2013 Food and Drug Administration
Food Code, which includes provisions for food establishments on
preventing food allergic reactions. Working in collaboration with
other stakeholders, the agencies also should propose that the next
Food Code requires that the person in charge in food establish­
ments pass an accredited food safety certification program that
includes basic food allergy management in order to decrease or
prevent the risk of food allergen exposure. In addition, agencies
should develop guidance on effective approaches to inform con­
sumers with food allergies in food service establishments.
Guidance on effective approaches to inform consumers with
food allergens in food service establishments could include menu
designations of allergens and posters, and other forms of displaying
information about food allergens in food establishments.
The CDC Voluntary Guidelines for Managing Food Allergies in Schools
and Early Care and Education Programs (the CDC Food Allergy Guide­
lines) includes essential management approaches, such as preparing for
food allergy emergencies, but they have not been implemented widely in
all schools. Higher education institutions do not have similar guidelines.

16

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Although reports of severe reactions while flying are rare, accidents can
occur and improving policies and practices might prevent them. In response
to its task, the committee developed specific recommendations for ways
to assure that appropriate guidance and education are in place to create a
safe public environment for individuals with food allergy. In doing so, the
committee recognized that its task did not include recommendations for
therapeutic intervention or clinical management of food allergies.
The committee recommends that, within the next year, relevant
federal agencies (e.g., the Food and Drug Administration [FDA],
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], the Federal
Aviation Administration) convene a special task force that includes
participants from the medical community, food companies, and
advocacy stakeholder groups to establish and implement policy
guidelines to:
•
•

•

Assure emergency epinephrine capabilities are in place for chil­
dren and adults in public venues, including schools, early care
and education facilities, and on-board airlines;
Provide standardized food allergy and anaphylaxis first aid
training (e.g., identification of major food allergens, signs and
symptoms of allergic reactions, and emergency treatment pro­
tocols) to appropriate school and university health staff, early
care and education providers, and on-board flight crews; and
Implement education standards for responding to and man­
aging food allergy emergencies in schools and early care and
education facilities (e.g., CDC Food Allergy Guidelines), and
on airlines.

The committee recommends that the FDA continue to work
together with other relevant federal, state, and local agencies to
develop and implement labeling policies specific to allergenic ingre­
dients in packaged and prepared foods that are distributed through
airlines and other public venues, including schools and early care
and education facilities.
Expand Research Programs
The committee lists research needs in areas of mechanisms of action,
better diagnostic tools, effective educational approaches, and evidencebased guidelines for all stakeholders, and prospective and clinical trials to
support or refute current hypotheses on the development of food allergies.
In addition, although the committee did not review emerging therapeutic

SUMMARY

17

approaches to cure food allergies, it included development of effective and
safe therapies as a key long-term goal. The details of the research needs are
in Chapter 9.
The committee envisions that this report will reach many stakehold­
ers, including consumers, patients, health care providers, school leaders,
food manufacturers, and food establishment managers, and serve as guid­
ance for future understanding and management of food allergies. The
committee also has confidence that the recommendations in this report, if
implemented, will stimulate progress in the understanding of food allergies,
reduce further uptakes in prevalence, and improve the quality of life of
those with this chronic disease and their caregivers.

1
Introduction

FOOD ALLERGIES: CHARTING A ROADMAP TO SAFETY
Over the past 20 years, public concerns have grown in response to the
apparent rising prevalence of food allergy and related atopic conditions,1
such as eczema. Although evidence on the true prevalence of food allergy
is complicated by insufficient or inconsistent data and studies with variable
methodologies, many health care experts who care for patients agree that
a real increase in food allergy has occurred and that it is unlikely to be due
simply to an increase in awareness and better tools for diagnosis. Many
stakeholders are concerned about these increases, including the general
public, policy makers, regulatory agencies, the food industry, scientists,
clinicians, and especially families of children and young people suffering
from food allergy.
Food allergy has important implications not only for those individuals
directly affected but also for their families, day care and school settings,
and society (Gupta, 2014; Pawanker et al., 2011). Some children naturally
grow out of a food allergy, while other children or adults develop a food
allergy for the first time later in life. In either case, having a food allergy is
a chronic disease that can influence a person’s quality of life throughout the
lifespan and, in some unfortunate individuals, lead to death. The human
stories of food-related anaphylaxis and the heavy burden of protecting
children from foods that might initiate such serious allergic conditions are
1 The atopic conditions of childhood consist of the triad of asthma, allergic rhinitis, and
atopic dermatitis. All share a common pathogenesis, being mediated by immunoglobulin E
(IgE), and are frequently present together in the same individual and family.

19

20

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

BOX 1-1
Statements from Children or Their Caretakers
Statements from children and adolescents (6-15 years old) with food allergy
in focus groups (DunnGalvin et al., 2009)
“There’s always food around you know . . . it doesn’t have to be a food party”
“When I take a first bite, there’s a moment when you think, is this it?”
“Nearly everything says ‘may contain’ so what can you eat?”
“Unlike my friends, I always have to be on [my] guard. . . . I envy them not
having to be.”
“They say you’re just looking for attention.”
“. . . the same thing again and again . . . be careful, be careful . . . do you
have your pen . . . watch what you eat . . . I need to have a life.”
“I was at a barbecue and Mum forgot to ask what was in the burger . . .
there were eggs in the burger and my eyes and lips swelled up and it was scary.”
“You feel like you are choking; you have to get given the pen and then go
to the hospital.”
“I get lumps in my stomach and my eyes get red and I’m in agony.”
“You know your throat is meant to be this size [indicates] and it swells to
about this size [indicates]. It gets really hard to breath. . . . I can’t get my breath
. . . and you feel scared . . . so scared.”
“I only go to friends’ houses who I know for ages . . . it’s safer that way”

particularly compelling. This burden includes fear of accidental consump­
tion, difficulties with missing (or misunderstood) food labels, and bullying
at school. Those not afflicted with such a disorder may have difficulty even
imagining what life is like for severely food-allergic individuals, some of
whom are allergic to multiple commonly encountered foods, such as milk,
eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, and shellfish. To illustrate some of these issues,
Box 1-1 includes real-life example statements from children, adolescents
(DunnGalvin et al., 2009) and caretakers (Kahn, 2014; Monaco, 2015) as

INTRODUCTION

21

“The girl next to me in school always has nuts . . . and I feel worried but I
don’t like to say anything; nobody needs to know.”
“On Halloween they throw nuts at me but you can’t tell the teacher or they’ll
say you’re a whiney baby; you only tell your best friends; I only told my best friend
but she told everyone . . . and then I was teased.”
“It’s not the teasing . . . it’s the isolation . . . that’s what gets you.”
Statement from a caretaker
“. . . at seven months old, he was diagnosed with food allergies. The diagnosis was not to just one, but to four different food allergens: dairy, wheat, eggs and
peanuts. . . . This was no mere intolerance. These were life-threatening allergies.
. . . What I can do is to make sure that, as my baby grows, he learns to protect
himself. . . . As a parent of a child with food allergies, I always have to be prepared. This is no simple feat. I carry emergency medications such as epinephrine
auto-injectors, antihistamines, and an asthma inhaler. I vigilantly stay prepared
with food. You never know when you will wind up somewhere that does not have
a safe choice, such as a friend’s house where they cannot accommodate your
child’s allergies.”
By Adrienne Kahn; posted on September 11, 2014, at AllergicLiving.com.

“Ever since my children were diagnosed with these [food] allergies, each
moment has been a growing educational (and often empowering) experience. My
husband and I felt it was very important from the initial diagnosis to be honest with
Vincent about what would happen if he ingested peanuts, tree nuts, or anything
that was cross-contaminated with them. We taught him how to carry and use the
epinephrine auto-injector, how not to accept food from anyone but family, and
never to take off his medical ID bracelet.”
By Meghan Monaco; posted on June 9, 2015, at AllergicLiving.com.

they describe quality-of-life impacts and hazards of having a severe food
allergy.
Ultimately, answering questions about the actual prevalence of food
allergy, the mechanisms underlying allergen sensitization and the develop­
ment of food allergy, and how to estimate the severity of disease in affected
individuals, among many other research questions, requires adequate sup­
port from research funding sources. Similarly, protecting those with food
allergy from accidental exposure and providing appropriate treatment for

22

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

those who develop reactions, demand effective governmental policy and
consumer protections across multiple sectors, including agricultural pro­
duction, the food industry, product labeling, regulatory authorities, and the
food and entertainment industries. At the present time, however, despite a
mounting body of data on the prevalence, health consequences, and associ­
ated costs of food allergy, this chronic disease has not garnered the level of
societal attention that it warrants. Moreover, for patients and families at
risk, recommendations and guidelines have not been clear about preventing
exposure or the onset of reactions or for managing this disease.
In brief, the scientific knowledge about food allergy has significant gaps
and, for those at risk, few or no reliable prevention strategies or treatments
exist. How did we get to this situation? First, the accepted gold standard
for identifying a food allergy—the oral food challenge (OFC)—has not
been used widely due to difficulties of the procedure (e.g., risk of a severe
reaction, length of procedure, the need to standardize the food), especially
in research where large numbers of study participants are needed.
Second, conducting research on food allergy presents various types of
practical barriers: studies are very costly due to the long duration of typi­
cal therapeutic studies (e.g., 2 to 4 years); the heterogeneity of participants;
difficulty recruiting participants; and notably, too few research centers and
researchers equipped to conduct high-quality studies.
Third, food allergy is a complicated, multifactorial disease and research­
ers do not fully understand its causes, mechanisms, and effects. Except for
having atopic parents (i.e. parents with a predisposition to allergic reac­
tions), the contributions of various factors to food allergy remain unclear
and under investigation. Genetics, time, route of allergen exposure, diet,
factors related to pregnancy and lactation, and the microbiome all are being
studied as potential influences on the development of food allergy. The fact
that food allergy develops in infants makes the research difficult, as con­
ducting trials during pregnancy or in infants could be unethical.
Finally, few effective therapies for food allergy currently exist. The
gaps in scientific understanding have impaired the development of effective
therapies, although many promising ones are being investigated.
Professional medical associations continue to update their practice
guidelines for food allergy despite limitations in the evidence, based on the
most recent knowledge on diagnosis, prevention, treatment, and manage­
ment. Yet, unlike other chronic diseases related to diet, such as diabetes or
cardiovascular diseases, where specific strategies for prevention or manage­
ment have been established (ADA, 2015; Goff et al., 2014), recommenda­
tions by governments or professional associations for preventing the onset
of a food allergy have been hampered by limited or inconsistent data.
Recent and ongoing research and clinical progress on assessment, diagnosis,
and treatment of food allergy hold the promise of improving future practice

INTRODUCTION

23

and management strategies. These advances include the safe use of OFCs
as the gold standard for diagnosis, emerging data on the role of early expo­
sure to potential allergens for favoring prevention, and high-quality studies
of effective therapies. Indeed, based on the latest findings in food allergy
prevention science, and particularly the latest findings on the protective
effects of early exposure to peanut, leading organizations are rethinking
the current recommendations and considering promising new approaches.
Still, new thinking and approaches can have the unintended consequence
of confusing parents and all the institutions that interact with people with
food allergy, including schools, airlines, and restaurants.
For individuals who are already diagnosed, complete avoidance is still
the only established method for preventing a reaction and, as indicated in
Box 1-1, it is not easy to achieve. This is particularly the case when effective
policies and practices are not implemented in places where foods are pur­
chased or consumed (e.g., the hospitality and food service industries). Like­
wise, policies to ensure that relevant settings are prepared to identify and
treat a severe reaction are not always enacted, implemented, or enforced.
For example, epinephrine may not be available in relevant places, such as
early care and education centers, schools, afterschool programs, camps,
or airplanes. To promote greater safety in such settings, nongovernmental
organizations are creating tools and guidelines to increase awareness, help
parents and children with strategies for avoiding allergens, advocate for bet­
ter policies, and/or increase the effectiveness of research efforts. Likewise,
professional organizations of various industry sectors (e.g., manufacturers,
retailers, food service) have created guidelines and training programs for
their stakeholders. Federal, state, and local governments also are beginning
to include allergy management as an element of their food safety policies.
However, despite all the policies and guidelines for the various settings
(e.g., food industry practices, regulatory agencies, early care and education
centers, schools, higher education, and public transport), their development
may not be keeping pace with the science and their implementation and
enforcement varies greatly across the United States.
In addition, food allergy is a major global challenge and prevention
strategies are needed across the globe. Although the prevalence and imple­
mentation of policies will vary by country, similar management approaches
could be adopted across countries.
For all of these reasons, it was thought to be timely and important, in
the interest of public health, for the National Academies of Sciences, Engi­
neering, and Medicine to conduct a consensus study to review the science
and management practices of food allergy. The committee intends that this
report will (1) clarify the nature of the disease, its causes, and its current
management, (2) highlight gaps in knowledge, (3) encourage the implemen­
tation of management tools at many levels and among many stakeholders,

24

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

and (4) delineate a roadmap to safety for those who have, or are at risk of
developing, food allergy, as well as for others in society who are responsible
for public health.
STATEMENT OF TASK
This study originated as a result of the broad public interest in the
health aspects of food allergy; the relevance to public health, health care,
and society; and the current lack of solutions both for the prevention of
food allergy and its management. The apparent increase in food allergies,
and concerns about a lack of good management strategies, prompted infor­
mal discussions that resulted in a planning meeting in Washington, DC,
under the auspices of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine on May 24, 2014. Various experts gave presentations on what
is known about food allergy prevalence, causes, and risk determinants;
perceptions regarding food labeling; and treatment approaches. Representa­
tives from stakeholder groups with an interest in food allergy also attended.
The group discussed the concerns related to those topics and provided
comments about questions that would be of value to include in a consensus
study from the National Academies. Following this meeting, a Statement of
Task (see Box 1-2) was developed with contributions from all stakeholders.
APPROACH OF THE COMMITTEE
Expert Committee and Advisory Panel
An ad hoc committee of 15 experts was selected and nominated to
respond to the statement of task. Committee members were drawn from
a broad range of disciplines, including food allergens and methods of
detection, pediatrics, clinical medicine, immune-related illness, genetics,
epigenetics, the microbiome, epidemiology, biostatistics, nutrition/dietetics,
food safety, public education, public health policy, clinical trials, predic­
tion and prevention of food allergy, and child development. To expand the
geographical context and experiences, food allergy experts from the United
Kingdom and Australia were included in the committee. The committee
held one public session on June 22, 2015, and one public workshop on
August 31-September 1, 2015, to gather information. The committee also
met on five occasions in closed sessions to discuss the findings, draw conclu­
sions, and craft recommendations. The public session and workshop were
valuable in providing the committee with the perspectives of sponsoring
organizations and with information regarding diverse aspects related to the
task (see Appendix A for public sessions and workshop agenda).
In order for the committee to consider the perspectives of those affected

25

INTRODUCTION

BOX 1-1
Statement of Task
A committee will be formed to examine critical issues related to food allergy,
including the prevalence and severity of food allergy and its impact on affected
individuals, families, and communities; and current understanding of food allergy
as a disease, and in diagnostics, treatments, prevention, and public policy. This
consensus study will engage a broad array of stakeholders, including government
agencies, organizations, academic institutions, industries, policy makers, and
patient organization groups, to bring together leading investigators from relevant
fields, clinicians, and parents; and to develop a framework for future work; and
to recommend actions by both government and nongovernment agencies. The
committee’s review of the evidence will consider the following key questions:
1. What are current trends in food allergy prevalence?
•
What is an appropriate definition of food allergy to use in measuring
prevalence?
•
What data or methods are most appropriate to use in measuring
prevalence and how may they be implemented?
•
Should there be an effort to assess prevalence for allergens other
than the eight most common that are required to be disclosed on
food packages? If so, should the same methods be used for these
allergens?
2. What are the key prenatal/early life determinants of food allergy?
•
For example, are there dietary factors that impact development of food
allergy and are these modifiable?
3. What are the current data gaps in understanding the diagnosis and prognosis for food allergy?
•
What new approaches are being developed to address these data
gaps?
4. What steps can be taken to educate providers and the public in order to
create safe environments for food allergic children both within and outside
the home?
•
What and where are the most risky food scenarios and how can these
be better managed?
•
What guidance can be given to individuals about exposure to low
levels of allergens in food products?
5. What is the status of assessing allergen thresholds in individuals? What
additional methods or tools are needed?
6. What research gaps need to be filled in order to provide better guidance
to health care providers and policy makers?
The committee will develop a framework for future direction in understanding
food allergy and its impact on individuals, families, and communities; recommending steps to increase public awareness of food allergy; promoting research on
both disease causation and management; and informing preventive approaches
to food allergy. Research gaps will be identified and recommendations made to
fill them.

26

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

by food allergy, the study also included an advisory panel made up of nine
parents of children with food allergies and one individual with food allergy.
The advisory panel members were selected from a group of approximately
50 individuals recommended by the sponsor organizations. All members of
the advisory panel live with the challenges of food allergy on a daily basis
and some are active advocates in their communities, participants in policy
work and public speaking, or mentors for families who are new to food
allergy. Although their opinions may not represent those of all people with
the disease, they were invaluable to the committee as good examples of the
sentiments and burden of living with food allergy. Some of the concerns
brought up by this panel included the need for more clarity in food label­
ing, appropriate training for emergency personnel, access to epinephrine,
and for improvements in well-being and safety at specific settings, such as
schools, camps, restaurants, and transportation.
Boundaries and Clarifications About the Task
As mentioned above, food allergy, as a chronic disease, shares charac­
teristics with other conditions and diseases. It is therefore necessary to be
very clear about the task and its interpretation by the committee. The com­
mittee focused its efforts on the questions in the statement of task as they
refer to the definition of food allergy by the National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
This definition states that food allergy is “an adverse health effect arising
from a specific immune response that occurs reproducibly on exposure to
a given food.” Food allergies fall into two major types—immunoglobulin E
(IgE)-mediated and non-IgE-mediated—and the committee focused mostly
on IgE-mediated food allergies (see Chapter 2 for definitions). Some of the
discussions, where appropriate, also pertained to non-IgE-mediated food
allergies, such as food protein–induced enterocolitis, particularly when
discussing diagnostic methodologies that are unique for each type of food
allergy. However, the literature reviews, findings, conclusions, and rec­
ommendations reviewed in this consensus study refer exclusively to IgE­
mediated food allergies. Other food-related diseases, such as celiac disease,
or food intolerances, such as lactose intolerance, or toxicity of food addi­
tives, are not covered in this report because they were beyond the scope of
the statement of task.
Although any protein can be allergenic, certain proteins and specific
foods that contain them (e.g., Ara h 2 in peanut) are characteristically aller­
genic and have been recognized as such because of the frequency or severity
of the symptoms they cause in individuals at risk. The list of common aller­
genic foods varies by country. This variation is often due to the nature of diets
or native foods in a given region but also to different criteria that are used

INTRODUCTION

27

to qualify a food for inclusion in the list. The committee’s literature reviews
were conducted from the perspective of foods that are considered allergenic
in the United States. However, global evidence was considered to the extent
that it informed the central issues the committee reviewed. Moreover, most
recommendations also apply to any allergenic food today or those that may
become clinically important allergens in the future. The committee did not
review the scientific or regulatory aspects of the potential for proteins from
genetically modified foods to be allergenic. The reader is referred to the 2016
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine report Geneti­
cally Engineered Crops: Experiences and Prospects for a review and recom­
mendations on this topic (NASEM, 2016).
Although the study is meant to have a global perspective, it would not
be feasible to answer all the questions in the statement of task from the
perspective of all countries. Research data are being generated worldwide
but implementation of research findings depends on contextual factors that
would be different for each country or region. When it was valuable and
feasible to do so, data collected about implementation in the United States,
as well as in other countries, were used to guide the committee’s delibera­
tions and recommendations. It should be noted that while the recommen­
dations are focused on the United States, many could be implemented in
other regions of the world.
This report is not meant to duplicate or replace important guidelines
that have been developed in the past and that will continue to provide
essential information about progress in diagnosis, treatment, and manage­
ment of food allergy in the United States. Instead, this report is meant to be
a call for unified action among all stakeholders and the public, both to rec­
ognize the importance of this disease and to join forces in efforts to mark­
edly improve our ability to understand, effectively manage, and ultimately,
cure this disease, and to make the world safer for those afflicted with it.
Rather than conducting evidence-based reviews for all topics relevant to
the task, the committee offered the support of specific guidelines where
appropriate. In addition, the committee has conducted selected evidencebased reviews of the scientific literature where recent developments or the
need for reinforcement deemed it necessary. Moreover, the committee did
not review therapeutic approaches that are currently being investigated and
instead recommended more research efforts in this area. These key guide­
lines include the following: 2010 NIAID/NIH-sponsored Guidelines for the
Diagnosis and Management of Food Allergy in the United States: Report
of the NIAID-Sponsored Expert Panel (Boyce et al., 2010), the European
Academy of Allergy & Clinical Immunology (EAACI) Food Allergy and
Anaphylaxis Guidelines (Muraro et al., 2014), two Practice Parameters
(Lieberman et al., 2015; Sampson et al., 2014), and two Clinical Reports
(Sicherer et al., 2007, 2010). Table 1-1 includes the guidelines (and system­

EAACI systematic reviews

Systematic reviews:
• de Silva et al., 2014
• Dhami et al., 2014
• Nwaru et al., 2014
• Panesar et al., 2013
• Salvilla et al., 2014
• Soares-Weiser et al., 2014

European Academy of Allergy
& Clinical Immunology
(EAACI)

Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis
Guidelines

EAACI Guidelines

RAND systematic review

Systematic review:
Chafen et al., 2010
Muraro et al., 2014

NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines

Boyce et al., 2010

National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID)/
National Institutes of Health
(NIH)

Guidelines for the Diagnosis
and Management of Food
Allergy in the United States:
Report of the NIAID-Sponsored
Expert Panel

Referenced in This Report as

Authors and Date

Organization

Title

TABLE 1-1 Food Allergy Guidelines and Systematic Reviews

28

Sampson et al., 2014

Lieberman et al., 2015

Sicherer et al., 2007

Sicherer et al., 2010

Joint Task Force on Practice
Parameters representing the
American Academy of Allergy,
Asthma & Immunology
(AAAAI)
American College of Allergy,
Asthma & Immunology
(ACAAI)
Joint Council of Allergy, Asthma
& Immunology (JCAAI)

Joint Task Force on Practice
Parameters, representing
AAAAI, ACAAI, and JCAAI

American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP)

AAP

Food Allergy: A Practice
Parameter Update

Anaphylaxis—A Practice
Parameter Update

Clinical Report—Management
of Food Allergy in the School
Setting

Self-Injectable Epinephrine
for First-Aid Management of
Anaphylaxis

2010 AAP Clinical Report

2007 AAP Clinical Report

AAAAI Practice Parameter

AAAAI Guidelines

29

30

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

atic reviews on which they were based) and the names by which they are
referred to in this report.
Gathering the Evidence
In addition to holding the public session and the information gather­
ing workshop mentioned above and detailed in Appendix A, the commit­
tee used various approaches to respond to the questions in the statement
of task. For example, it was possible to rely on the scientific literature to
answer some of the questions. However, for questions related to current
practices in the various settings encountered by those with food allergies,
the committee relied more often on information gathered at workshops
and/or by consulting the “gray literature” (published reports or research
outside the traditional peer-reviewed scientific journals and commercial
publications).
For example, to answer questions related to the prevalence of food
allergy and the key prenatal and early life determinants of food allergies,
evidence-based reviews were conducted as described in the report. To
answer questions related to the definition, diagnosis, and prognosis of food
allergy, as well as those related to managing food allergy in the health care
setting, the committee did not conduct an extensive review of the literature
because relevant recommendations have already been addressed in very
recent authoritative reports. In such cases, primary resources for the find­
ings, conclusions, and recommendations of the committee were derived
from the 2010 NIAID/NIH-sponsored Guidelines (Boyce et al., 2010); the
2014 EAACI Guidelines and systematic review (de Silva et al., 2014; Dhami
et al., 2014; Muraro et al., 2014), as well as the 2015 American Academy
of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology (AAAAI) Guidelines (Lieberman et al.,
2015), the 2014 AAAAI Practice Parameter (Sampson et al., 2014), and the
two American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Clinical Reports (Sicherer et
al., 2007, 2010). Additional searches in scientific databases were performed
to identify specific items in the literature to supplement the discussion
about specific topics, paying special attention to papers published after the
aforementioned reports.
A DEVELOPMENTAL AND ECOLOGICAL
PERSPECTIVE ON FOOD ALLERGY
During its review and deliberations, the committee recognized that
addressing the task and goals of the consensus study would benefit from
taking a developmental and ecological perspective. Preventing and treat­
ing food allergy, and delineating a roadmap to safety are a multifaceted
undertaking that must take into account many interacting systems that

INTRODUCTION

31

influence both risks and safety. For every individual, the risks and possible
protections for food allergy vary and change over the life course, depending
on individual genetic factors, biological development, exposures to aller­
gens, and the nature of the contexts in which the individual lives. From a
societal and public health perspective, the safety and well-being of many
potential individuals with food allergy requires recognition that risks and
protections for public safety are spread across many systems, including food
production and distribution systems, health care systems, and education
systems, among others. This section explains how the committee undertook
a developmental and ecological approach toward the health and safety of
individuals with food allergy.
Ecological Models of Individual Development
Ecological models of individual human development emphasize that the
individual interacts with many social, cultural, and environmental systems
throughout life and these interactions shape the development, health, and
well-being of the individual over the life course (Boyce and Kobor, 2015;
Bronfenbrenner and Morris, 2006; Gottlieb, 2007; IOM, 2005; Lickliter,
2013; Overton, 2013). These interactions span genetic to societal levels
(Gottlieb, 2007; Lerner, 2006; Lickliter, 2013; Overton, 2013). The impor­
tance of taking a relational developmental systems approach to health
promotion also has been applied by others (Halfon et al., 2014). From this
perspective, the health and well-being of a developing individual is con­
stantly changing as the individual interacts with the physical and biological
environment, schools, family, and other contexts throughout life.
Proximal ecological systems (i.e., the social, cultural, and physical
contexts) with which individuals interact directly over the life course have
been termed “microsystems” in Bronfenbrenner’s bioecological model
(Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Bronfenbrenner and Morris, 2006). In general, the
health and well-being of individuals and populations with respect to food
allergy are influenced by biological systems within individuals, including the
microbiome, as well as human biological systems, and also their interac­
tions with their physical contexts, including the built environment, plants,
animals, microbiotic organisms, water quality, or climate, that could influ­
ence food allergy risk and/or protective processes.
Throughout the life course, however, the systems with which a person
interacts vary. Before birth, a developing fetus interacts indirectly with
systems in the broader context because the mother’s body is the entire
proximal context and essentially all current extrinsic influences (e.g., diet
or psychological trauma) are mediated by processes linking the fetus to the
mother’s biological function. After birth, the caregiving system (i.e., parents
and other caregivers) plays a primary role in mediating the experiences

32

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

of a baby, but now the child has additional direct experiences with other
people and physical environments (e.g., health care, early care and educa­
tion centers, and the social environments). As children continue to develop,
they join and interact directly with numerous new systems, including peer
groups, schools, and community services for children and families. Eventu­
ally, children begin to interact directly with social media, workplaces, and
social and recreational contexts, such as sport teams, and religious or other
cultural contexts.
Individuals also are influenced by many additional systems beyond
their proximal interactions, through the influences of cultural practices
and governmental or nongovernmental policies or rules that shape their
contexts and experiences within societies and social groups. These rela­
tively distal systems in the social ecology that influence individual develop­
ment indirectly have been termed “macrosystems” (Bronfenbrenner, 1979;
Bronfenbrenner and Morris, 2006). In the context of food allergy, for
example, macrosystems include the laws and regulatory systems that affect
food or the transportation industries and health care systems, religion, or
mass media.
Human individuals adapt to the contexts of their development in multi­
ple ways. An organism can adapt to a wider range of environments because
developmental plasticity makes it possible for the developing phenotype to
adjust to the environment in which it will live (Boyce and Kobor, 2015;
Del Giudice et al., 2011; Hochberg et al., 2011; Szyf and Bick, 2013). For
example, many of the adaptive systems that sustain health and well-being,
including immune functions, stress responses, and language development,
require some calibration for effectiveness within a given environment. It is
conceivable that changes in modern life, including urbanization, mobility,
and rapid environmental change, may have disrupted some processes of
adaptive calibration, such that an individual could be “tuned” for one envi­
ronment but live in or move to a radically different context. For example,
exposure to microorganisms may trigger different responses depending
on the timing. Growing up on a farm in a context of exposure to a rich
assortment of microorganisms early in life may have protective influences
on the risk for developing asthma. However, initial exposure to the same
organisms later in life can trigger allergic responses (Figueiredo et al.,
2013; Guerra and Martinez, 2008; von Mutius and Radon, 2008). The
developmental timing of a person’s interactions with his or her context is
an important consideration for understanding the origins and prevention of
food allergy. Research is revealing that the timing of exposure to potential
allergens can be a key determinant of whether or not food allergy develops
in those at risk. The development and vulnerabilities to food allergy likely
depend on an array of sensitivities to context that also may be shaped by
the timing of exposures to potential allergens and other environmental fac­

INTRODUCTION

33

tors. The committee considers these to be vital factors in promoting health
and well-being for those at risk of developing food allergy.
From the perspective of an individual person or that person’s caregiv­
ers, a roadmap for safety in regard to food allergy must include a devel­
opmental understanding of current individual vulnerabilities and risks,
informed by individual history, plus a detailed analysis of the risks and
protective factors embedded in the contexts in which that person lives. A
parent or caregiver actively protects a child with an allergy until that indi­
vidual can manage on his or her own. As Box 1-1 illustrates, management
of food allergy at the individual level can be challenging and complex.
However, the task of a society to protect all its members with food allergy
is even more complicated.
Complex Adaptive Systems in the Prevention, Treatment,
and Management of Food Allergy
Health care and public safety systems have been described as examples
of complex adaptive systems (Hammond, 2009; IOM and NRC, 2015;
Lipsitz, 2012; Reiman et al., 2015). A complex adaptive system is com­
posed of many heterogeneous elements whose interactions drive the system
in ways that cannot be easily understood from considering only the separate
elements. The elements can be social, physical, or biological. Specific prop­
erties characterize a complex adaptive system: individuality and adapta­
tion, feedback and interdependence, heterogeneity, spatial complexity, and
dynamic complexity (IOM and NRC, 2015).
Considering public risk, adaptation, and safety in relation to food
allergy, examples of complex adaptive system features include the indepen­
dent behavior of many individuals or their parents acting to avoid allergen
exposure in the diet of self or child (adaptation and independence); the
diverse responses of individual consumers to labels about allergens in food
and to the experience of severe reactions to specific foods (independence,
adaptation, heterogeneity); the actions of many independent businesses to
customer concerns about allergies (independence, adaptation, heterogene­
ity, feedback) or to implementation of new state and federal regulations
governing food production or sales (adaptation); the variation in sensitivity
of individuals to the same potential allergen (adaptation, heterogeneity);
the fact that different foods are considered allergenic in different countries
(spatial complexity); and immunological changes during early development
(dynamic complexity).
Efforts to change the safety of complex adaptive systems are compli­
cated, whether the target of change is the entire public health care system,
the commercial transportation systems, or the food production and ser­
vice industries. Change is likely to require attention to issues of leverage,

34
resistance, cascading effects, and unanticipated consequences, as well as
recognition that a single strategy is unlikely to change a large and multi­
faceted adaptive system. Changing one element in a complex system can
have unanticipated consequences that raise problems in another part of the
interconnected systems network. Moreover, it is difficult to move a com­
plex system in the desired direction due to the complexity, heterogeneity,
independence, and dynamic nature of its many component systems. Thus,
solving problems in a complex adaptive system involves consideration
of multiple levels and systems, multiple sectors, and multiple strategies.
From this perspective, managing food allergy would include consideration
of the roles of diverse actors, a multiplicity of processes, nonlinear and
unexpected-emergent effects, counter-regulatory feedback loops, and many
systems operating at different levels to achieve disparate goals. Examples
of the many actors and settings (i.e., elements) that have a role in prevent­
ing and treating food allergy are individuals, families, schools, workplaces,
food and transportation industries, and health care systems. As Reiman et
al. (2015) stated, “Safety management of complex adaptive systems pres­
ents a great challenge” (p. 90). It may require appreciation of complexity in
understanding and addressing the issues, distribution of adaptive capacity
across levels, a balance of rules and flexibility, and an interactive process
to steer the system toward greater safety.
ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT
This introductory chapter describes how and why the study originated,
the charge to the committee, and the developmental and ecological con­
text. Chapter 2 is a background chapter that describes the definition of
food allergy that the committee adopted, explains common food allergy
signs and symptoms, summarizes common allergenic foods, and explains
the mechanism of food allergy. It also comments on the misinformation
among the many stakeholders in regard to what a food allergy is and how
to prevent and manage it. Chapter 3 summarizes what is known about the
prevalence of food allergy in the United States and abroad, highlighting the
limitations in methods, especially in regard to prevalence trends. Chapter 4
includes the current diagnostic and prognostic methods used and others
that are under investigation. Chapter 5 presents current knowledge about
prenatal and early life determinants of food allergies, including genetic and
environmental factors. Chapters 6, 7, and 8 contextualize the ways in which
food allergy is currently managed in the health care system (Chapter 6),
the food manufacturing industry (Chapter 7), and other settings such as
schools and restaurants (Chapter 8). Chapter 9 includes all the commit­
tee’s recommendations for research. Finally, Chapter 10 culminates with
the committee’s vision of a roadmap to safety, discussing how food allergy

35

INTRODUCTION

can be prevented and managed based on evolving knowledge, taking into
consideration the roles and responsibilities of the many actors and settings
that an individual interacts with throughout the life course.
The committee envisions that this report will reach the many stakehold­
ers, including the general consumer, patients, health care providers, school
leaders, food manufacturers and establishment managers, and serve as
guidance for future understanding and management of food allergies. The
committee also has confidence that the recommendations in this report, if
implemented, will stimulate progress in the understanding of food allergies,
reduce further uptakes in prevalence, and improve the quality of life of
those with this chronic disease and their caregivers.
REFERENCES
ADA (American Diabetes Association). 2015. Clinical practice recommendations. http://
www.diabetes.org/research-and-practice/we-support-your-doctor/clinical-practice­
recommendations.html (accessed April 29, 2016).
Boyce, J. A., A. Assa’ad, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, H. A. Sampson, R. A. Wood, M. Plaut,
S. F. Cooper, M. J. Fenton, S. H. Arshad, S. L. Bahna, L. A. Beck, C. Byrd-Bredbenner,
C. A. Camargo, Jr., L. Eichenfield, G. T. Furuta, J. M. Hanifin, C. Jones, M. Kraft, B. D.
Levy, P. Lieberman, S. Luccioli, K. M. McCall, L. C. Schneider, R. A. Simon, F. E. Simons,
S. J. Teach, B. P. Yawn, and J. M. Schwaninger. 2010. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: Summary of the NIAID-Sponsored
Expert Panel Report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(6):1105-1118.
Boyce, W. T., and M. S. Kobor. 2015. Development and the epigenome: The “synapse” of
gene-environment interplay. Devel Sci18(1):1-23.
Bronfenbrenner, U. 1979. The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and
design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bronfenbrenner, U., and P. A. Morris. 2006. The ecology of developmental processes. In
Handbook of Child Psychology, 6th ed. 4 vols, edited by W. Damon and R. M. Lerner.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Chafen, J. J., S. J. Newberry, M. A. Riedl, D. M. Bravata, M. Maglione, M. J. Suttorp, V.
Sundaram, N. M. Paige, A. Towfigh, B. J. Hulley, and P. G. Shekelle. 2010. Diagnosing
and managing common food allergies: A systematic review. JAMA 303(18):1848-1856.
de Silva, D., M. Geromi, S. S. Panesar, A. Muraro, T. Werfel, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber,
G. Roberts, V. Cardona, A. E. Dubois, S. Halken, A. Host, L. K. Poulsen, R. Van Ree,
B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, I. Agache, and A. Sheikh. 2014. Acute and long-term management
of food allergy: Systematic review. Allergy 69(2):159-167.
Del Giudice, M., B. J. Ellis, and E. A. Shirtcliff. 2011. The Adaptive Calibration Model of
stress responsivity. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35(7):1562-1592.
Dhami, S., S. S. Panesar, G. Roberts, A. Muraro, M. Worm, M. B. Bilo, V. Cardona, A. E.
Dubois, A. DunnGalvin, P. Eigenmann, M. Fernandez-Rivas, S. Halken, G. Lack, B.
Niggemann, F. Rueff, A. F. Santos, B. Vlieg-Boerstra, Z. Q. Zolkipli, and A. Sheikh.
2014. Management of anaphylaxis: A systematic review. Allergy 69(2):168-175.
DunnGalvin, A., A. Gaffney, and J. O. Hourihane. 2009. Developmental pathways in food
allergy: A new theoretical framework. Allergy 64(4):560-568.

36

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Figueiredo, C. A., L. D. Amorim, N. M. Alcantara-Neves, S. M. A. Matos, P. J. Cooper, L. C.
Rodrigues, and M. L. Barreto. 2013. Environmental conditions, immunologic pheno­
types, atopy, and asthma: New evidence of how the hygiene hypothesis operates in Latin
America. J Allergy Clin Immunol 131(4):1064-1068.
Goff, D. C., Jr., D. M. Lloyd-Jones, G. Bennett, S. Coady, R. B. D’Agostino, R. Gibbons, P.
Greenland, D. T. Lackland, D. Levy, C. J. O’Donnell, J. G. Robinson, J. S. Schwartz,
S. T. Shero, S. C. Smith, Jr., P. Sorlie, N. J. Stone, P. W. Wilson, H. S. Jordan, L. Nevo,
J. Wnek, J. L. Anderson, J. L. Halperin, N. M. Albert, B. Bozkurt, R. G. Brindis, L. H.
Curtis, D. DeMets, J. S. Hochman, R. J. Kovacs, E. M. Ohman, S. J. Pressler, F. W.
Sellke, W. K. Shen, S. C. Smith, Jr., G. F. Tomaselli, and American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice. 2014. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on
the assessment of cardiovascular risk: A report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 129(25 Suppl
2):S49-S73.
Gottlieb, G. 2007. Probabilistic epigenesis. Devel Sci 10(1):1-11.
Guerra, S., and F. D. Martinez. 2008. Asthma genetics: From linear to multifactorial ap­
proaches. Ann Rev Medicine 59:327-341.
Gupta, R. S. 2014. Anaphylaxis in the young adult population. Am J Medicine 127(1 Suppl):
S17-S24.
Halfon, N., K. Larson, M. Lu, E. Tullis, and S. Russ. 2014. Lifecourse health development:
Past, present and future. Matern Child Health J 18(2):344-365.
Hammond, R. A. 2009. Complex systems modeling for obesity research. Prev Chronic Dis
6(3):A97.
Hochberg, Z., R. Feil, M. Constancia, M. Fraga, C. Junien, J. C. Carel, P. Boileau, Y.
Le Bouc, C. L. Deal, K. Lillycrop, R. Scharfmann, A. Sheppard, M. Skinner, M. Szyf,
R. A. Waterland, D. J. Waxman, E. Whitelaw, K. Ong, and K. Albertsson-Wikland.
2011. Child health, developmental plasticity, and epigenetic programming. Endocr Rev
32(2):159-224.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2005. Preventing childhood obesity: Health in the balance.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM and NRC (National Research Council). 2015. A framework for assessing effects of the
food system. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Kahn, A. 2014. How we dialed down food allergy fears, and let son thrive. Allergic Living.
http://allergicliving.com/2014/09/11/how-we-dialed-down-food-allergy-fears-and-let-son­
thrive/ (accessed August 15, 2016).
Lerner, R. M. 2006. Developmental science, developmental systems, and contemporary theo­
ries. In Handbook of Child Psychology. Volume 1: Theoretical Models of Human Devel­
opment, edited by R. M. Lerner. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons. Pp. 1-17.
Lickliter, R. 2013. Biological development: Theoretical approaches, techniques, and key find­
ings. In The Oxford Handbook of Developmental Psychology. Volume 1: Body and
Mind, edited by P. D. Zelazo. New York: Oxford University Press. Pp. 65-90.
Lieberman, P., R. A. Nicklas, C. Randolph, J. Oppenheimer, D. Bernstein, J. Bernstein, A. Ellis,
D. B. Golden, P. Greenberger, S. Kemp, D. Khan, D. Ledford, J. Lieberman, D. Metcalfe,
A. Nowak-Wegrzyn, S. Sicherer, D. Wallace, J. Blessing-Moore, D. Lang, J. M. Portnoy,
D. Schuller, S. Spector, and S. A. Tilles. 2015. Anaphylaxis—A practice parameter update
2015. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 115(5):341-384.
Lipsitz, L. A. 2012. Understanding health care as a complex system: The foundation for un­
intended consequences. JAMA 308(3):243-244.
Monaco, M. 2015. Little brother’s fearless food allergy advocate. Allergic Living. http://allergic
living.com/2015/06/09/little-brothers-fearless-food-allergy-advocate (accessed August 15,
2016).

INTRODUCTION

37

Muraro, A., T. Werfel, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, G. Roberts, K. Beyer, C. Bindslev-Jensen,
V. Cardona, A. Dubois, G. duToit, P. Eigenmann, M. Fernandez Rivas, S. Halken, L.
Hickstein, A. Host, E. Knol, G. Lack, M. J. Marchisotto, B. Niggemann, B. I. Nwaru,
N. G. Papadopoulos, L. K. Poulsen, A. F. Santos, I. Skypala, A. Schoepfer, R. Van Ree, C.
Venter, M. Worm, B. Vlieg-Boerstra, S. Panesar, D. de Silva, K. Soares-Weiser, A. Sheikh,
B. K. Ballmer-Weber, C. Nilsson, N. W. de Jong, and C. A. Akdis. 2014. EAACI food
allergy and anaphylaxis guidelines: Diagnosis and management of food allergy. Allergy
69(8):1008-1025.
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine). 2016. Genetically
engineered crops: Experiences and prospects. Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press.
Nwaru, B. I., L. Hickstein, S. S. Panesar, G. Roberts, A. Muraro, and A. Sheikh. 2014.
Prevalence of common food allergies in Europe: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Allergy 69(8):992-1007.
Overton, W. F. 2013. A new paradigm for developmental science: Relationism and relationaldevelopmental systems. Applied Developmental Science 17(2):94-107.
Panesar, S. S., S. Javad, D. de Silva, B. I. Nwaru, L. Hickstein, A. Muraro, G. Roberts,
M. Worm, M. B. Bilo, V. Cardona, A. E. Dubois, A. Dunn Galvin, P. Eigenmann, M.
Fernandez-Rivas, S. Halken, G. Lack, B. Niggemann, A. F. Santos, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra,
Z. Q. Zolkipli, and A. Sheikh. 2013. The epidemiology of anaphylaxis in Europe: A
systematic review. Allergy 68(11):1353-1361.
Pawanker R, G. Canonica, S. Holgate, and R. Lockey. 2011. WAO White Book on Allergy
2011-2012. United Kingdom: World Allergy Organization. http://www.worldallergy.org/
definingthespecialty/2011_white_book.php (accessed August 15, 2016).
Reiman, T., C. Rollenhagen, E. Pietikainen, and J. Heikkila. 2015. Principles of adaptive
management in complex safety-critical organizations. Safety Sci 71:80-92.
Salvilla, S. A., A. E. Dubois, B. M. Flokstra-de Blok, S. S. Panesar, A. Worth, S. Patel, A.
Muraro, S. Halken, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, A. DunnGalvin, J. O. Hourihane, L.
Regent, N. W. de Jong, G. Roberts, and A. Sheikh. 2014. Disease-specific health-related
quality of life instruments for IgE-mediated food allergy. Allergy 69(7):834-844.
Sampson, H. A., S. Aceves, S. A. Bock, J. James, S. Jones, D. Lang, K. Nadeau, A. NowakWegrzyn, J. Oppenheimer, T. T. Perry, C. Randolph, S. H. Sicherer, R. A. Simon, B. P.
Vickery, and R. Wood. 2014. Food allergy: A practice parameter update—2014. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 134(5):1016-1025.
Sicherer, S. H., F. E. Simons, and the Section on Allergy and Immunology. 2007. Self-injectable
epinephrine for first-aid management of anaphylaxis. Pediatrics 119(3):638-646.
Sicherer, S. H., T. Mahr, and the Section on Allergy and Immunology. 2010. Management of
food allergy in the school setting. Pediatrics 126(6):1232-1239.
Soares-Weiser, K., Y. Takwoingi, S. S. Panesar, A. Muraro, T. Werfel, K. HoffmannSommergruber, G. Roberts, S. Halken, L. Poulsen, R. van Ree, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, and
A. Sheikh. 2014. The diagnosis of food allergy: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Allergy 69(1):76-86.
Szyf, M., and J. Bick. 2013. DNA methylation: A mechanism for embedding early life experi­
ences in the genome. Child Dev 84(1):49-57.
von Mutius, E., and K. Radon. 2008. Living on a farm: Impact on asthma induction and
clinical course. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 28(3):631-647.

2
Definitions

Collecting the evidence needed to develop effective diagnostic
approaches, prevention strategies, therapies, and management procedures
to prevent, manage, and treat food allergy requires that the physicians,
biomedical and pharmaceutical scientists, policy makers, affected individu­
als and families, and all other stakeholders share a common understanding
of what food allergy is and is not. In addition, although all proteins in
foods have the potential to elicit a food allergy, some have been recog­
nized as major allergens due to their potency in inducing a food allergy
or in affecting the prevalence of allergy to those food constituents in the
population. The list varies depending on the country but several ones are
common globally. This introductory chapter begins by defining food allergy
both by describing its signs and symptoms and by presenting our current
understanding of how food allergy develops in affected individuals. The
chapter also distinguishes food allergy from the many other adverse effects
or conditions that could be related to foods but that have a nonimmuno­
logical origin. Considering the diversity of food adverse conditions with
similar symptomatology and clinical manifestations (see Figure 2-1), it is no
wonder that many misconceptions persist about food allergy. Even today,
many questions are still unresolved. The most pressing research questions
are detailed in Chapter 9.

39

40

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Adve
erse Reactionss

Im
mmunological
(Hyp
per sensitivitie
es)

IgE mediaated
(e.g., Pollen
associated
food alle
ergy
syndrom
me)

Non-Immunologicaal
(In
ntolerances)

Non-IgE
diated
med
(e.g., Food
oteinpro
induced
ocolitis)
entero

Toxicologicaal
(e.g., Scombro
oid
poisoning)

Metaabolic
(e.g., LLactose
intoleerance)

Microbial

Toxins
(e..g., Staphyloco
occal
enterotoxins)

Infections
(e.g.,, Salmonellosiss)

FIGURE 2-1 Types of adverse reactions to foods.

FOOD ALLERGIES: DEFINITIONS
Commonly Accepted Definitions
Food allergy is “an adverse health effect arising from a specific immune
response that occurs reproducibly on exposure to a given food,” accord­
ing to the 2010 National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health (NIAID/NIH)-supported Guidelines for the
Diagnosis and Management of Food Allergy in the United States (NIAID/
NIH-supported Guidelines) (Boyce et al., 2010). “Exposure” in the food
allergy context can be through ingestion, skin contact, or exposure to air­
borne particles. The immunologic component is central to the discussion
of food allergy, including the underlying mechanisms of allergic reactions
and methods of diagnosis and treatment. Adverse reactions to foods or food
components that lack an identified immunologic pathophysiology are not
considered food allergy, but instead are typically called food intolerances
(Boyce et al., 2010). These reactions are not a focus of this report. The
mechanisms behind these other conditions may include metabolic, phar­
macologic, or toxic factors.
A food is defined as “any substance—whether processed, semiprocessed, or raw—that is intended for human consumption, and includes
drinks, chewing gum, food additives, and dietary supplements” (Boyce et
al., 2010). Food allergens are the components within foods that trigger
immunologic reactions. These are most often specific glycoproteins, which
can interact with the body’s immune cells in a way that initiates the devel­
opment of a food allergy.

41

DEFINITIONS

The broad terms allergy and allergic disease refer to a disease caused
by immunologic dysfunction that fall under one of two key classifications:
immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated or non-IgE-mediated (see Tables 2-1 and
2-2). This report focuses almost exclusively on IgE-mediated food allergy,
which has better defined underlying cellular mechanisms and an established
link to many prevalent food allergy reactions. Non-IgE-mediated food
allergy reactions (e.g., food protein–induced enterocolitis) are less common
and the mechanisms of the reactions are less well characterized. Celiac dis­
ease is a well-characterized, immune-mediated disease that has food as an
exacerbating factor but will not be detailed in this report.
Immunoglobulin E is an antibody that, if bound to certain cells bearing
receptors for IgE, can trigger intense inflammatory reactions in response
to the allergen for which the cell-bound IgE has specificity. The presence
and quantity of such allergen-specific IgE antibodies is a key metric in
diagnosing and evaluating food allergy sensitivities. However, the quan­
tity of IgE antibodies ranges widely, making quantification an incomplete

TABLE 2-1 Overall Differences Between IgE- and Non-IgE-Mediated
Food Allergies
Class

IgE-Mediated

Non-IgE-Mediated

Time to onset of reaction

Immediate
<2 hoursa

Delayed
Often >4-6 hours

Volume usually required
for reaction

Small

Sometimes larger

Typical symptoms

Urticaria
Angioedema
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Oral itching
Anaphylaxis

Diarrhea
Food refusal
Failure to thrive
Gastroesophageal reflux
Irritability/abdominal
distension
Eczema

Common
diagnostic procedures

Above signs or symptoms
by history or oral food
challenge
and
positive IgE antibody
(skin prick test or serum
specific IgE)

Sometimes can do home-based
elimination and rechallenge
sequence; some require
rechallenge in hospital setting

a In the case of mammalian meat, onset times for reactions related to galactose-alpha-1,
3-galactose (alpha-gal) can be longer than 2 hours. (See “Delayed Anaphylaxis Associated with
Mammalian Meats” in Chapter 4.)

42

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 2-2 Types of Food Allergies
GI Food Allergies
IgE-mediated
Immediate gastrointestinal
(GI) hypersensitivity

Pollen-associated food
allergy syndrome (PFAS)
Non-IgE-mediated
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
(EG)

Upper GI symptoms may occur within minutes; lower GI
symptoms may occur either immediately or with a delay of
up to several hours. Immediate vomiting is the most common
reaction and the one most clearly mediated by IgE.
PFAS is an IgE-mediated allergy, often to raw fruits or
vegetables, with symptoms including itching or swelling of
the lips, mouth, and throat.
EG is thought to be non-IgE-mediated although IgE-mediated
is possible. EG symptoms vary depending on the portion
of the GI tract involved and the localized or widespread
infiltration of the GI tract by eosinophils.

Eosinophilic esophagitis
(EoE)

EoE symptoms vary depending on the age of the person,
from reflux-like symptoms and vomiting in school-age
children, to refusal to eat and impaction in teenagers and
adults.

Food protein–induced
enteropathy

Vomiting, diarrhea, and sometimes protein-losing
enteropathy occur in this condition.

Food protein–induced
allergic proctocolitis (AP)

AP typically presents as specks or streaks of blood mixed
with mucus in the stool of otherwise healthy infants. Foodspecific IgE is generally absent. The suspected role of food
allergy is based on history of exposure to allergens, not
diagnostic tests.

Food protein–induced
enterocolitis syndrome
(FPIES)

Non-IgE-mediated FPIES usually occurs in infants and
presents as chronic emesis, diarrhea, and failure to thrive.
Milk and soy protein are the leading, but not exclusive,
causes. The reaction is delayed, occurring approximately 2
hours or later after ingesting the food.
Cutaneous

IgE-mediated
Acute urticaria

Angioedema

Round and irregular pruritic (itchy) lesions appear quickly
after ingesting an allergenic food. Although IgE-mediated
food allergy often causes urticaria, it is not the leading cause.
Likely IgE-mediated when caused by food and involves
“non-pitting, non-pruritic, well-defined edematous swelling
that involves subcutaneous tissues, abdominal organs, or the
upper airway.” Upper airway involvement signifies a likely
medical emergency.

43

DEFINITIONS

TABLE 2-2 Continued
Contact urticaria

Can be induced by either an IgE-mediated food allergy or a
nonimmunologic histamine reaction.

Non-IgE-mediated
Atopic dermatitis (AD)

Allergic contact dermatitis
(ACD)

AD involves complex interactions between skin barrier
dysfunction and environmental factors, linked in some
individuals to mutations in the protein filaggrin. The role of
food allergy, from sensitization to subsequent skin reaction,
remains a topic of debate.
ACD is a form of eczema caused by reactions to chemical
haptens in foods; it is associated with marked pruritus,
erythema (redness of the skin), papules, vesicles, and edema.

SOURCE: Boyce et al., 2010.

indicator of function, allergen sensitivity, or reaction severity. Moreover,
some individuals with measurable IgE specific for particular food aller­
gens do not exhibit clinical signs and symptoms of food allergy when they
ingest such allergens. This supports the conclusion that allergen-specific
IgE is (by definition) required for a person to exhibit clinical food allergy
to that allergen, but the presence of such allergen-specific IgE is not suffi­
cient for a person to exhibit a food allergy to that allergen. IgE is typically
measured in serum or determined through allergen skin prick tests (Berin,
2015). The IgE-mediated reactions observed in patients with food allergy
are often grouped into immediate onset reactions and immediate plus latephase reactions and can include life-threatening anaphylaxis, gastrointesti­
nal hypersensitivity, urticaria, and pollen-associated food allergy syndrome
(Berin, 2015). Allergen-specific IgE may be detectable in atopic dermatitis
(AD) and eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) and these may be food-responsive
disorders, but a direct correlation of the pathology in these disorders with
IgE and specific food allergen triggers is less clear (see Box 2-1 for these
and other basic definitions).
Common Food Allergy Signs and Symptoms
Food allergy can manifest through a wide range of signs and symptoms
with varying severity, which makes diagnosis challenging, particularly if a
history of allergic reactions has not already been established (see Chapter 4).
The most common signs and symptoms typically manifest on the skin (i.e.,
cutaneous), in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, in the respiratory system, or
in all of these areas. These signs and symptoms include development of uti­
caria (hives), angioedema (tissue swelling), circulatory collapse, dizziness,
coughing, vomiting, stomach cramps, nausea, and others (ACAAI, 2015).

44

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

BOX 2-1
Definitions
Allergen-specific IgE is an IgE that recognizes a specific allergen and that is
formed by the immune systems of some individuals after they have been exposed
to that allergen in food.
Anaphylaxis is an acute, potentially life-threatening syndrome with multisystemic
manifestations due to the rapid release of inflammatory mediators.
Desensitization is a state of clinical and immunological nonresponsiveness to an
allergen, including food allergens, that can be induced by the careful, physicianguided administration of gradually increasing amounts of the offending allergen
over a relatively short period of time (hours to days). The maintenance of such
desensitization typically requires continued regular exposure to the offending allergen (also see Tolerance).
Food allergens are the components within foods that trigger adverse immunologic reactions; these are most often specific glycoproteins that can interact with
the body’s immune cells in a way that initiates the development of a food allergy.
Food allergy is an adverse health effect arising from a specific immune response
that occurs reproducibly on exposure to a given food, and that can be either IgEmediated or non-IgE-mediated.
Food intolerance is an adverse reaction to foods or food components that lacks
an identified immunologic pathophysiology.

Food allergy is rarely the principal cause of respiratory conditions,
but IgE-mediated respiratory symptoms can be a key finding in diagnos­
ing anaphylaxis (James, 2003). In addition, occupational asthma caused
by exposure to food occurs more frequently among individuals in certain
professions such as bakers, millers, or grain elevator workers. A number
of specific cutaneous and GI food allergy conditions, as defined by the
NIAID, are listed in Table 2-2. Food-induced anaphylaxis—which may
accompany or encompass other conditions—is an acute, potentially lifethreatening syndrome with multisystemic manifestations due to the rapid
release of inflammatory mediators (Boyce et al., 2010). It can occur within
minutes to a couple of hours of ingesting the food (or longer for alphagal reactions related to mammalian meat). The reaction usually develops
and, if appropriately treated, resolves completely within hours, but in rare

DEFINITIONS

45

Immunoglobulin E (IgE) is a type of antibody that can trigger intense inflammatory reactions. IgE causes the IgE-mediated allergic response by binding strongly
to IgE receptors (FcɛRI) found on the surface of mast cells and basophils, and
triggering these cells to release powerful inflammatory mediators once the cellbound IgE recognizes the offending food allergen.
Pollen-associated food allergy syndrome (PFAS) is a type of food allergy with
signs and symptoms that include itching or swelling of the lips, mouth, or throat
in response to eating certain raw fruits and vegetables. PFAS typically develops
in adults with hay fever. The specific IgE antibodies formed exhibit reactivity
with both proteins found in pollen and similar proteins found in certain fruits and
vegetables.
Sensitization is a condition in which an individual produces detectable IgE to a
particular allergen or allergens. It precedes and is required for the clinical manifestations of a food allergy, but not all individuals with detectable IgE will experience
a food allergy reaction to the allergen recognized by that IgE.
Tolerance is a state of unresponsiveness of the immune system to substances
or tissue that have the capacity to elicit an immune response. It can be natural
(e.g., to the body’s own proteins) or acquired (e.g., to external proteins). It is also
said that some persons can “grow out” of an allergy; this can be envisioned as
a form of acquired tolerance to the offending allergen(s). In some instances, the
state of tolerance may be transient (also see Desensitization) and in others it
can be durable.

instances symptoms can occur hours later. For some individuals, exercise
after ingesting an allergenic food may increase the likelihood of anaphy­
laxis and severity of clinical symptoms (Romano et al., 2001). In those
with severe and potentially life-threatening anaphylaxis, findings include
airway compromise (swelling of tissues in the throat and upper airways),
impaired breathing (e.g., nasal congestion and rhinorrhea and narrowing
of airways in the lungs), and/or circulatory problems (e.g., changes in heart
rate, shock). Skin and mucosal changes usually, but not always, also occur
(e.g., flushing, pruritus, hives in the skin; swelling of the tissues of the lips,
mouth, and GI system). For a more detailed description of anaphylaxis and
its diagnosis and management, see Chapter 6.

46

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Common Allergenic Foods and Food Allergens
Although, in theory, any protein molecule could be allergenic and a
large number of foods have been noted to cause IgE-mediated food allergy,
a small number of foods cause most of the clinical reactions (Boyce et al.,
2010). Foods that are categorized as allergenic differ by country because
the prevalence of food allergy caused by various foods differs by region of
the world and according to the eating habits within a population. In the
United States, the foods listed below are currently considered allergenic for
regulatory purposes. However, the committee did not restrict its findings,
conclusions, and recommendations to this list, and has included foods that
are viewed as allergenic by other countries (e.g., sesame and some fruits and
vegetables). The lists have regulatory implications for managing allergens
(e.g., food product labeling) that affect many stakeholders. Importantly, the
foods that are or are not on these “official” lists of allergens affect consum­
ers who need to avoid specific allergens, both in their country and when
they travel internationally. Chapter 7 includes a description of the criteria
that different countries follow in order to categorize a food as allergenic
and a list of foods that are commonly considered allergenic in various coun­
tries. Chapter 7 also includes the committee’s recommendations to update
the list of allergens in the United States.
In each of these allergenic foods, specific glycoproteins trigger the
reaction and production of IgE antibodies that are reactive with those gly­
coproteins (during the period when the patient is becoming sensitized to
those allergens). Clinical reactions are then triggered upon re-exposure to
such foods after sensitization has occurred. Identifying and tracking these
allergenic proteins and how they are affected by factors such as variation
in food preparation is crucial to understanding mechanisms of food allergy
reactions and potential avenues of prevention or treatment. For example,
it will be important to understand how and why certain processes of food
preparation can neutralize or diminish the ability of allergens either to
induce sensitization or elicit clinical reactions (see also Chapter 7). Each
type of allergenic food can contain a major or several allergenic proteins,
as illustrated by the following list:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Peanuts: Ara h 1, Ara h 2, Ara h 3, Ara h 8, Ara h 9
Milk: aS1-casein, aS2-casein, b-casein, k-casein, b-lactoglobulin,
α-lactalbumin
Eggs: ovomucoid, ovalbumin, ovotransferrin, lysozyme
Fish: parvalbumin
Shellfish: tropomyosin
Wheat: Tri a 12, Tri a 14, Tri a 19, Tri a 21, Tri a 26
Soy: Gly m 1, Gly m 4, Gly m 5, Gly m 6, Gly m 8

47

DEFINITIONS

Food Allergy Misconceptions
Perceptions of food allergy conditions, patterns, and treatments can
have a profound impact on both patient safety and cultural/societal accom­
modations for those with food allergy. Misconceptions persist among doc­
tors, patients with allergies, and the general public—some of which could
be potentially dangerous. Misconceptions are particularly significant among
parents or guardians, as food allergy often manifests first in children.
Misconceptions fall into two major types: those related to basic con­
cepts or management of a food allergy. This section addresses the former.
The timing of the clinical symptoms after food ingestion, how long symp­
toms of food allergy actually last after ingestion, and the foods more or
less likely to cause severe symptoms are often misunderstood. Bock (1987)
reported that 28 percent of parents thought that their children had adverse
reactions to foods but only 8 percent of the children actually did when
challenged with the food. The Chicago Food Allergy Research Survey for
Parents of Children with Food Allergy, a study conducted in 2008, solicited
answers from 2,945 parents from across the United States (Gupta et al.,
2010a); significant misconceptions or absences in knowledge were revealed.
Some 52 percent of parents answered that anaphylaxis was more likely to
be fatal in children than in adolescents, while the opposite is true. Almost
half of participants believed that there is a cure for food allergy and more
than two-thirds believed that a medicine could be taken as prevention.
Furthermore, 40 percent of respondents reported “experiencing hostility
from other parents when trying to accommodate their child’s food allergy.”
That perceived hostility might point to a lack of awareness among the
general public, which can fail to recognize legitimate food allergy dangers.
However, another study (Gupta et al., 2009) concluded that most members
of the public recognize the real risk of food allergy–related deaths and
can even identify key symptoms. Other misconceptions among surveyed
parents include a belief that food additive allergies are common (actually
rare, despite the prevalence of additives in processed foods) and a lack of
awareness about the rates at which children outgrow certain food allergy
sensitivities (Gupta et al., 2010a).
These inaccurate beliefs were less common among parents who visited
allergists rather than primary care physicians, which points to the poten­
tial lack of knowledge outside of specialists. Medical practitioners, and
especially allergists, have an ongoing responsibility to educate the public,
patients, and their fellow physicians (see Chapter 6). However, numer­
ous studies suggest deficits in understanding these basic concepts among
many different stakeholders, including physicians (Desjardins et al., 2013;
Morawetz et al., 2014). Various surveys indicate misunderstandings among
medical professionals in recognizing risk factors for food allergy reactions,

48

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

including anaphylaxis (Clark et al., 2004; Gupta et al., 2010b; Turner et
al., 2016; Wang et al., 2014).
Knowledge deficits regarding food allergy also have been noted among
school nurses (Carlisle et al., 2010), child care providers (Greiwe et al.,
2015), emergency response providers (Jacobsen et al., 2012), restaurant
personnel (Ahuja and Sicherer, 2007; Bailey et al., 2011), and teachers
(Ercan et al., 2012; Polloni et al., 2013). Overall, stakeholders and the
general public are currently insufficiently educated (see also Chapters 4,
5, and 6).
MECHANISMS
Mechanisms of Disease
This report is not meant to delve deeply into the basic mechanisms
underlying food allergy, but mainly to address more practical aspects, such
as diagnosis and management. Still, unraveling the pathological processes
of food allergy is critical for understanding how to diagnose and clinically
evaluate food allergy and for developing short- and long-term mitigation
strategies. The intricate biological systems involved and the wide range
of clinical manifestations of food allergy make this a long-term process
characterized by incremental, albeit ultimately important, progress. For
purposes of this report, this section briefly explores two principal aspects
of clinical food allergy: the mechanism of the reaction and the mechanism
of immunological tolerance. Figure 2-2 represents the mechanistic interac­
tions and complexities of food allergy, which are not fully described in this
section. For a more detailed description of the processes readers are referred
to other publications (e.g., Berin, 2015; Chinthrajah et al., 2016).
Specific food allergies likely are a result of complex interactions among
genes and the environment (including not only factors in the “external
environment,” such as pollen, pollution, and pathogenic microbes, but
also effects of the microbes that normally reside in us—the “internal envi­
ronment” of the microbiome) (see Chapter 5 for a detailed description of
current knowledge on food allergy determinant factors).
With IgE-mediated food allergy—the classification under review here—
allergic sensitization must precede manifestation of the full reaction. Sensiti­
zation is defined as the process by which an individual produces detectable
IgE to a particular allergen (allergen-specific IgE [sIgE]). This can be called,
operationally, the “offending allergen.” (See also Figure 2-2 for an explana­
tion of this process and Box 2-2 for definitions of key cellular components
in food allergy reactions.) However, it is important to recognize that sensi­
tization alone does not constitute clinical food allergy. In fact, sensitization
can persist without the patient manifesting any clinical signs of food allergy.

49

DEFINITIONS

This finding is an important part of understanding the diagnostic workup
in food allergy. Having sIgE against a food allergen means the person has
been sensitized to that allergen and therefore might exhibit a clinical food
allergy reaction to that allergen, but a more specific test (the double-blind,
placebo-controlled oral food challenge) would be required to diagnosis an
allergy to that food in such a sensitized person.
Some allergens produce organ-specific reactions, but the mechanisms
that could explain such clinical variation are not well understood. For
example, peanut and egg are the most common triggers of GI symptoms, and
peanut causes more respiratory reactions than other allergens (Berin, 2015).
It has been increasingly recognized that skin exposure can be a pow­
erful driving factor in food sensitization. One leading hypothesis about
how sensitization occurs is that humans naturally become tolerant to food
encountered orally in the diet, but sensitization is favored, at least in “sus­
ceptible” individuals, through skin exposure (see Chapter 5). The interplay
between reactions occurring in the skin and within the GI tract is thought
to be an important element of sensitization. For example, loss-of-function
variants in the gene encoding filaggrin, a key protein in the regulation of
epidermal barrier function and health, have an established link to eczema,
but research also links variants in filaggrin to food allergy (Lack, 2012).
Lack of normal skin barrier integrity facilitates the development of food
allergy. Peanut sensitization in particular is linked with skin exposure, but
studies also show that childhood use of lotions containing oat led to much
higher rates of oat allergies (Boussault et al., 2007). The molecular under­
pinnings of this hypothesis, however, are not fully understood.
Mechanisms of Tolerance and Desensitization
Two major terms that are used for defining a situation that is com­
monly known as “growing out” of a food allergy are desensitization and
tolerance (see Figure 2-1). In some instances, natural tolerance (as opposed
to the tolerance induced by specific therapeutic interventions) to some
foods that once induced food allergy in that individual will develop over
time. Accounts of spontaneous resolution of IgE-mediated food allergy vary
according to food, age, and geography, but estimates indicate that 65 to
80 percent of individuals will develop such natural tolerance for cow milk,
wheat, soy, and egg, and only 10 to 20 percent for peanut and tree nuts
(Campbell et al., 2015).
For those who have not acquired tolerance naturally, a cure for food
allergy does not exist yet. Strategies of management and treatment include
avoidance of allergens, immediate treatment of symptoms, and the induc­
tion of tolerance. Multiple mechanisms play a role in regulating food
allergy, many of which are extrathymic, resulting in a range of clinical

50

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

A

SENSITIZATION (Development of food-allergen-specific IgE antibodies [sIgE])
Regional lymph nodes
(or intestinal mucosa)

Intestinal epithelium (or skin [not shown])
allergen

1A

Source of early IL-4

4 DC presents processed allergenderived peptide ( ) to naive T cell
jagged
Epithelial cell
2

Th2 cell

notch

3
DC migration
Naive
T cell

Allergen uptake
and processing by
dendritic cells (DCs)

Mast cell

(located in tissues)

8

Allergen specific lgE (slgE)

IL-4
IL-13 ICOS

specific for
the allergenderived peptide

T cell receptor
MHC class II molecule
7

FcԑRI

specific for the
allergen-derived
peptide

5

CD40 ligand
T cell receptor
Allergen-derived
peptide
CD40
MHC class II
molecule

ICOS
ligand

B cell

slgE production

specific for a
component of
the allergen

(and dissemination via blood stream)

Allergen non-specific lgE

Plasma cell
secreting slgE

6

Intestinal smooth muscle

Th2 cell drives production of sIgE
The patient is asymptomatic
during sensitization

allergen

9

B cell receptor specific
for a component of
the allergen

Basophil (in blood)
“sensitized” with sIgE, but
not activated by allergen for
mediator release

1B
(and there is no reaction to allergen in
intestines of non-sensitized subjects)

B

IMMEDIATE GI HYPERSENSITIVY (Induced by allergen and sIgE in sensitized subjects)

increased mucus production

1B

Intestinal epithelium
1A
Goblet cell

des
epti
rop
neu

4

ia
to
ne rs
s

ki

histamine

des

epti

rop

neu

m

3

10
Activated basophil (in blood)
secretes mediators
(e.g., histamine, PAF)

13

tam

es

kin

cyto

Intestines react within minutes
of allergen exposure
14
leukocyte recruitment
(transition to LPR)

IL-8, MCP-1
his

s

tor

edia

11

ki

to

cy

12

TNF, PGD2, LTB4,

neuropeptides

5

s
ne

s

to

ed

kine

cy

m

cyto

Nerve cell

Cross-linking of
FcԑRI-bound slgE
by allergen
2
Activated
mast cell

6

7

histamine, PGD2,
cys-LTs, PAF

allergen

ine

VE

GF

,c

-A

ys-

LTs
,

allergen 9
enters blood

peristalisis and contraction of intestines

vasodilation

8
fluid enters
tissues

increased vascular permeability

Intestinal smooth muscle

FIGURE 2-2 Mechanisms by which a person first becomes sensitized to a food al­
lergen and subsequently can develop an acute allergic reaction when exposed again
to that food allergen.

DEFINITIONS

51

A. Sensitization is the process by which food allergens induce the development of
food-specific serum IgE (sIgE). 1A. Allergens present in foods cross the small intestinal
epithelium (if present in the individual’s environment; for example, peanut proteins
also may enter the body through the epidermis of the skin [not shown]). These pro­
cesses can be enhanced at sites that have genetically-determined or acquired defects
in normal barrier function, such as at sites in the skin affected by atopic dermatitis
(also known as eczema). 1B. This initial exposure to allergen does not elicit an acute
reaction, such as in the intestines, because there is no allergen-specific IgE present at
this time. However, (2) the allergen is taken up and processed by a dendritic cell (DC)
located in the intestinal mucosa (or skin [not shown]) which then (3) migrates to a
regional lymph node (or to another location in the intestinal mucosa or skin). 4. The
DC presents the processed allergen-derived peptide to a naïve T cell whose T cell re­
ceptor is specific for that allergen-derived peptide. The DC does this by presenting the
allergen-derived peptide (that is physically associated with a major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II molecule on the DC membrane) to the T cell by way of the
T cell’s membrane-associated T cell receptor (TCR). The DC and naïve T cell also are
bound to each other by co-stimulatory molecules (e.g., jagged on the DC membrane
and notch on the T cell membrane) that enhance this cell-cell interaction. 5. In the
presence of IL-4 (that can be derived from any of a number of cell sources) such naïve
T cells acquire features of a T helper cell type 2 (Th2 cell, a type of T cell that can
help to drive the sIgE production seen in patients who become sensitized to allergens)
and this T cell clone expands by proliferation. 6. A Th2 cell bearing the TCR that
recognizes the specific allergen-derived peptide interacts with a B cell whose B cell
receptor has recognized some component of the same allergen (that may have entered
the environment of the B cells located in lymphoid tissue by travelling through lymph
draining the tissues of the intestines or skin) and has internalized and processed it into
an allergen-derived peptide that it presents to the allergen-derived peptide-specific Th2
cell by way of the MHC class II molecule on the B cell surface. The Th2 cell and B cell
also interact physically through co-stimulatory molecules (shown are Th2 cell ICOS
and CD40 ligand interacting with B cell ICOS ligand and CD40, respectively). This
Th2 cell-B cell interaction activates both cells (e.g., the Th2 cells increase production
of IL-4 and IL-13, which, along with the CD40-CD40 ligand interaction, stimulates
the B cells to switch to production of sIgE) and to differentiate into plasma cells that
(7) can produce and secrete large amounts of the sIgE, which can diffuse locally in
the tissues and enter the blood, resulting in the systemic distribution of sIgE to other
sites in the body. 8 & 9. The sIgE is bound with high affinity (i.e., strongly) to special
receptors for IgE (FceRI) that are present in large numbers on the surface of (8) mast
cells, that are located in the tissues of the gastrointestinal tract and (not shown) the
skin, upper and lower airways, and many other anatomic sites, and (9) basophils,
leukocytes that are present in low numbers in the circulating blood. Because mast
cells and basophils have thousands of FceRI on their surface, they can bind many
IgE antibodies, including those specific for this allergen (sIgE, shown in green in the
figure) and those with specificities for other allergens or non-allergens (shown in blue
in the figure). The presence of these sIgE molecules on the surface of mast cells and
basophils gives little or no activation signal to the cells, but prepares them to undergo
activation upon subsequent exposure to the allergen recognized by the sIgE.
continued

52

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

FIGURE 2-2 Continued
B. Immediate GI Hypersensitivity. This is the rapidly developing reaction ob­
served when some sensitized subjects are exposed to allergen recognized by their
sIgE. It is important to emphasize that, for reasons not understood, many sensi­
tized subjects do not develop any clinical reactions upon exposure to the allergens
recognized by their sIgE whereas other sensitized individuals can rapidly develop
severe reactions upon exposure to the same allergen. 1A. The sensitized individual
consumes a food containing the allergen recognized by that person’s sIgE, and the
allergen passes through the intestinal epithelium, initiating a series of processes
that can (1B) rapidly (within minutes for many common food allergens, but within
hours for certain allergens present in red meats) induce a clinical response, including
contraction of the smooth muscle of the intestines. 2. The allergen, now in the in­
testinal tissues, is recognized by two or more sIgE molecules bound to FceRI on the
surface of a mast cell, causing aggregation of the sIgE and the FceRIs to which they
are bound, thereby activating the mast cell to release histamine and a wide variety
of other chemicals (“mediators,” such as prostaglandin D2 [PGD2], cysteinyl leu­
kotrienes [cys-LTs], leukotriene B4 [LTB4], and platelet activating factor [PAF]) and
cytokines (such as tumor necrosis factor [TNF], interleukin 8 [IL-8], monocyte che­
moattractant protein-1 [MCP-1], and vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF])
that can have diverse effects on the local cells and tissues, and, when released in
large quantities, can enter the blood and cause signs and symptoms in other sites
like the skin, upper and lower airways, and cardiovascular system. Effects of the
released mast cell mediators and cytokines include (3) increased intestinal peristalsis
and contractions, (4) stimulation of local nerves to release neuropeptides, which (5)
can induce effects on intestinal smooth muscle and (6) together with products de­
rived from activated mast cells, can increase mucus production by epithelial goblet
cells, (7) vasodilatation of blood vessels, (8) increased permeability of certain blood
vessels, resulting in the leakage of fluid into the tissues, which (9) favors the entry
of allergens from the tissues into the blood stream. Once allergen has entered the
blood, it can (10) bind to sIgE on the surface of blood basophils, causing aggrega­
tion of their FceRIs, thereby activating the basophils to release biologically active
mediators and cytokines that partially overlap with those secreted in the tissues by
mast cells. Products of activated mast cells also can (11) induce local structural cells,
such as intestinal epithelial cells, to (12) release products that can in turn influence
mast cell functions, including enhancing their secretion of mediators (11). Along
with (13) products secreted by activated mast cells, such products derived from
epithelial cells can have effects on local blood vessels that favor the local develop­
ment of inflammation, such as (14) the recruitment of circulating leukocytes. These
recruited leukocytes can help perpetuate the local inflammation, resulting in “late
phase reactions” (LPRs) that are associated with clinical signs and symptoms that
may persist or recur even hours after the initial exposure to the offending allergen,
and that may need continued treatment.

53

DEFINITIONS

BOX 2-2
Definition of Key Cellular Components
in Food Allergy Reactions
Basophils (basophilic granulocytes), the least abundant of the granulocytes (the
others being neutrophils and eosinophils), can release histamine, lipid mediators,
and cytokines in response to the aggregation of their cell surface FceRI, which is
induced when IgE bound to these FceRI recognizes specific allergens, including
those from foods. Unlike mast cells, basophils mature in the bone marrow and
circulate in the blood, but can enter tissues at sites of allergic inflammation.
Cytokines are small proteins produced by various immune cells and other cell
types that carry signals to facilitate communication and interaction between cells.
Epitopes are the specific fragments of food allergens (antigens) that the immune
system recognizes; if recognized by IgE bound to FceRI on the surface of mast
cells and basophils, epitopes can trigger an allergic reaction that may include
anaphylaxis.
FcεRI is the high-affinity receptor for IgE that binds IgE and thereby permits cells
bearing FceRI on their surface (e.g., mast cells, basophils, some dendritic cells,
and macrophages) to become “sensitized” so that they then can be activated to
release inflammatory mediators by allergens recognized by the bound IgE. For
the FceRI to initiate the cell signaling that results in activation of mast cells and
basophils to release their mediators requires that the receptors are aggregated
when their bound IgE reacts with allergens that are at least bivalent (e.g., have
two epitopes that can bind IgE). This permits such allergens to bridge adjacent IgE
molecules and to aggregate the FceRI receptors that bind such IgE.
Mast cells are derived from hematopoietic precursors that mature after migrating
into essentially all vascularized tissues, where they can reside for long periods
of time. Mast cells are present within the mucosal tissues of the entire GI tract
(and many other anatomical sites, including the skin and airways) and contain
cytoplasmic granules rich in histamine, proteoglycans (depending on the mast cell
population, these consist of heparin and/or chondroitin sulfates), serine proteases
(depending on the mast cell population, these can consist of carboxypeptidase A3,
tryptases, and/or chymase). Upon activation by IgE and specific antigens (including food allergens), mast cells can release such granule-associated inflammatory
mediators and also secrete newly synthesized lipid mediators and cytokines. Mast
cells also can be activated by diverse agents that act independently of IgE, which
can result in the release of the same products produced by mast cells activated
through IgE.
T cells are lymphocytes produced by the thymus that guide many aspects of the
immune system, particularly its adaptability and ability to recognize threats.

54

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

recommendations and conflicting data (Campbell et al., 2015). Hallmarks
of tolerance include a reduction in sIgE production, decreased allergen-IgE­
induced basophil activation, increased allergen-specific IgG4, and induction
of T regulatory (Treg) cells (Berin, 2015; Campbell et al., 2015; Chinthrajah
et al., 2016).
Recent studies have begun to investigate specific treatments to induce
food allergy desensitization or tolerance. It is important to understand that
the term desensitization is used here to mean that, while continuing on a
specific course of treatment with the offending allergen, the individual will
tolerate more of the food on food challenge, even in some cases to the point
of not reacting to “serving sized” amounts of the food. Desensitization,
however, does not guarantee true tolerance (defined here as a long-term
loss of clinical reactivity to the allergen under conditions of no further
exposure to the offending allergen). A more recent term, “sustained unre­
sponsiveness” was coined to describe what happens when the treatment for
food allergy is stopped. In some such individuals, unresponsiveness to the
offending allergen lasts weeks to months, while in others, desensitization is
lost more quickly. The mechanisms that may explain desensitization versus
sustained unresponsiveness versus true tolerance are being intensely inves­
tigated, as are approaches of immune system monitoring that might help
classify individuals into one of these three groups with respect to the out­
come of treatment. Some of the mechanisms by which treatments for food
allergy may be associated with changes in the clinical symptoms include the
occurrence during the treatment of natural tolerance noted above (this is
one reason why clinical studies of new treatments would include a placebo
group), reduction in production of allergen-specific IgE, decreased antigenand food-specific IgE-dependent basophil activation, increased allergenspecific IgG4 (one effect of which may be to bind allergen before it can be
encountered by sIgE and the surface of basophils and mast cells), and the
induction of Treg cells or anergic T cells (Campbell et al., 2015). However,
these possibilities, and others, are still under investigation). The major
unknown about the mechanism of oral treatment–induced desensitization
or tolerance is whether ongoing exposure to the protein in the food is neces­
sary to sustain long-term beneficial effects of the treatment.
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
Food allergy is defined as an adverse health effect arising from a specific
immune response that occurs reproducibly on exposure to a given food.
Various types of food allergies, such as immediate gastrointestinal hyper­
sensitivity or eosinophilic gastroenteritis, occur and they can be classified as
IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated food allergies. Many of them present
common respiratory, gastrointestinal, and cutaneous signs and symptoms.

55

DEFINITIONS

The definition and diagnosis of an allergy is rendered even more compli­
cated because other gastrointestinal conditions, such as a food intolerance,
can easily be misinterpreted as a food allergy. Given this diversity in signs
and symptoms and underlying mechanisms, many misconceptions exist
among the general public about what a food allergy is and how to identify
one. More importantly, these misconceptions also are common among phy­
sicians, emergency care personnel, nurses, and others who are recognized as
public health professionals. These misconceptions have tremendous impli­
cations for the public at large and specifically for allergic individuals and
their families. For example, a diagnostic error can affect health outcomes,
including psychological distress, or can lead to unnecessary management
strategies.
Many fundamental mechanisms are now understood regarding how
IgE-mediated food allergies develop and what is responsible for the signs
and symptoms induced during allergic reactions to food. For example, it
is well known that upon re-exposure following sensitization to an antigen,
the antigen-induced aggregation of antigen-specific IgE binds to recep­
tors on specialized cells (including mast cells in tissues and basophils in
the blood). Such aggregation activates those specialized cells, releasing
a variety of potent biological mediators that in turn result in the typical
food allergy signs and symptoms. However, many questions are still being
explored. A better understanding of the mechanistic processes underlying
food allergy, and of the mechanisms that contribute to the various poten­
tial host responses to different forms of therapy for food allergy, will be
invaluable in advancing the development of better prevention strategies,
diagnostic methods, and treatments of food allergy.
RESEARCH NEEDS
Conducting research related to the mechanistic processes underlying
food allergy is essential in making significant advances to develop better
methods to prevent disease or reduce its severity; predict, diagnose, and
monitor disease; and optimally manage and treat, and ultimately to cure,
food allergy. These mechanistic processes include disease predispositions,
origins and onset, normal and disordered oral tolerance to foods, factors
that contribute to disease severity, and variation in individual responses to
different forms of therapy.
One of the most prominent hypotheses for how food allergy develops—
the dual-allergen hypothesis—proposes that environmental exposure to
food allergens through the skin early in life can lead to allergy, while
consumption of these foods during a developmentally appropriate period
early in life results in tolerance. Under this hypothesis, children who avoid
allergens in their diet but are still exposed to them in the environment might

56

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

be more likely to develop an allergy than those not exposed. Supporting
this hypothesis are data suggesting that early dietary introduction of peanut
products may confer protection against peanut allergy as well as data sug­
gesting that loss of function of filaggrin, a protein important for epithelial
structure, confers a risk for food sensitization. However, many questions
remain about the mechanisms by which sensitization and tolerance occur
and about which elements of the immune system represent the most impor­
tant contributors to the severity of food allergy or the establishment of
tolerance. For example, studies have shown that biochemical indicators of
tolerance include a reduction in allergen-specific IgE production, decreased
allergen-IgE-induced basophil activation, increased allergen-specific IgG4,
and induction of Treg cells or anergic T cells. However, some of the data
are conflicting and more studies are needed to better understand the role
of these factors in food allergy
Another prevalent hypothesis is the microbial hypothesis, which states
that the decrease in early childhood exposure to microbes may alter the
development of early immunoregulatory responses, leading to the develop­
ment of allergic disorders. For example, exposure to microbes during the
perinatal period, may influence interactions between the developing micro­
biota and the immune system at the cellular and molecular levels and in
turn affect health outcomes. Although the potential relationships between
exposure to microbes early in life and the onset of food allergies have been
explored, specific changes in the microbial profile of individuals, their par­
ticular interactions with the immune system, and how these interactions
might be associated with food allergy have not been studied in depth.
To fill gaps in knowledge in this area, studies should be conducted to
accomplish the following objectives:

•
•

•

Elucidate the molecular and cellular mechanisms that account for
the differences between innate tolerance versus food sensitization
and between food sensitization versus food allergy.
Identify the mechanisms, in patients with food allergies, for acquir­
ing tolerance to the offending food allergen, without therapeutic
intervention, as well as for responding to therapeutic interventions
by developing transient desensitization versus sustained unrespon­
siveness versus true tolerance to the offending food allergens.
Define how particular products and functions of mast cells, baso­
phils, and other effector cells can contribute to the signs and symp­
toms of food allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, and identify
factors that may contribute to individual variation in the patho­
physiological responses to such products.

57

DEFINITIONS

•
•

•

Study the role of immunoglobulins other than IgE, such as IgG4 or
IgA, and of effector cells in addition to mast cells and basophils, in
modulating (i.e., enhancing or reducing) food allergic responses.
Identify and describe the roles of the skin and intestinal barriers in
protecting individuals from developing food sensitization or a food
allergy, and identify ways in which protective aspects of barrier
function can be enhanced and factors that diminish barrier func­
tion be reduced.
Examine the interactions between the microbiota and the host
immune system that may favor or protect against the development
of a food allergy, and define the extent to which the microbiota
or its products can be manipulated to enhance resistance to the
development of food allergy.
REFERENCES

ACAAI (American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology). 2015. Types of allergies: Food
allergy. http://acaai.org/allergies/types/food-allergies (accessed September 15, 2015).
Ahuja, R., and S. H. Sicherer. 2007. Food-allergy management from the perspective of restau­
rant and food establishment personnel. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 98(4):344-348.
Bailey, S., R. Albardiaz, A. J. Frew, and H. Smith. 2011. Restaurant staff’s knowledge of
anaphylaxis and dietary care of people with allergies. Clin Exp Allergy 41(5):713-717.
Berin, M. C. 2015. Pathogenesis of IgE-mediated food allergy. Clin Exp Allergy 45(10):
1483-1496.
Bock, S. A. 1987. Prospective appraisal of complaints of adverse reactions to foods in children
during the first 3 years of life. Pediatrics 79(5):683-688.
Boussault, P., C. Leaute-Labreze, E. Saubusse, S. Maurice-Tison, M. Perromat, S. Roul,
A. Sarrat, A. Taieb, and F. Boralevi. 2007. Oat sensitization in children with atopic der­
matitis: Prevalence, risks and associated factors. Allergy 62(11):1251-1256.
Boyce, J. A., A. Assa’ad, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, H. A. Sampson, R. A. Wood, M. Plaut,
S. F. Cooper, M. J. Fenton, S. H. Arshad, S. L. Bahna, L. A. Beck, C. Byrd-Bredbenner,
C. A. Camargo, Jr., L. Eichenfield, G. T. Furuta, J. M. Hanifin, C. Jones, M. Kraft, B. D.
Levy, P. Lieberman, S. Luccioli, K. M. McCall, L. C. Schneider, R. A. Simon, F. E. Simons,
S. J. Teach, B. P. Yawn, and J. M. Schwaninger. 2010. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: Report of the NIAID-sponsored expert
panel. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(6 Suppl):S1-S58.
Campbell, D. E., R. J. Boyle, C. A. Thornton, and S. L. Prescott. 2015. Mechanisms of allergic
disease—Environmental and genetic determinants for the development of allergy. Clin
Exp Allergy 45(5):844-858.
Carlisle, S. K., P. A. Vargas, S. Noone, P. Steele, S. H. Sicherer, A. W. Burks, and S. M. Jones.
2010. Food allergy education for school nurses: A needs assessment survey by the Con­
sortium of Food Allergy Research. J Sch Nurs 26(5):360-367.
Chinthrajah, R. S., J. D. Hernandez, S. D. Boyd, S. J. Galli, and K. C. Nadeau. 2016. Molecu­
lar and cellular mechanisms of food allergy and food tolerance. J Allergy Clin Immunol
137(4):984-997.
Clark, S., S. A. Bock, T. J. Gaeta, B. E. Brenner, R. K. Cydulka, and C. A. Camargo. 2004.
Multicenter study of emergency department visits for food allergies. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 113(2):347-352.

58

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Desjardins, M., A. Clarke, R. Alizadehfar, D. Grenier, H. Eisman, S. Carr, T. K. Vander Leek,
L. Teperman, N. Higgins, L. Joseph, G. Shand, and M. Ben-Shoshan. 2013. Canadian
allergists’ and nonallergists’ perception of epinephrine use and vaccination of persons
with egg allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(3):289-294.
Ercan, H., A. Ozen, H. Karatepe, M. Berber, and R. Cengizlier. 2012. Primary school teach­
ers’ knowledge about and attitudes toward anaphylaxis. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
23(5):428-432.
Greiwe, J. C., F. Pazheri, and B. Schroer. 2015. Nannies’ knowledge, attitude, and management
of food allergies of children: An online survey. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(1):63-67.
Gupta, R. S., J. S. Kim, E. E. Springston, B. Smith, J. A. Pongracic, X. Wang, and J. Holl.
2009. Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs in the United States. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 103(1):43-50.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, B. Smith, J. S. Kim, J. A. Pongracic, X. Wang, and J. Holl.
2010a. Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs of parents with food-allergic chil­
dren in the United States. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 21(6):927-934.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, J. S. Kim, B. Smith, J. A. Pongracic, X. Wang, and J. Holl.
2010b. Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs of primary care physicians. Pedi­
atrics 125(1):126-132.
Jacobsen, R. C., S. Toy, A. J. Bonham, J. A. Salomone, 3rd, J. Ruthstrom, and M. Gratton.
2012. Anaphylaxis knowledge among paramedics: Results of a national survey. Prehosp
Emerg Care 16(4):527-534.
James, J. M. 2003. Respiratory manifestations of food allergy. Pediatrics 111(6 Pt 3):1625-1630.
Lack, G. 2012. Update on risk factors for food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 129(5):
1187-1197.
Morawetz, D. Y., H. Hiscock, K. J. Allen, S. Davies, and M. H. Danchin. 2014. Manage­
ment of food allergy: A survey of Australian paediatricians. J Paediatr Child Health
50(6):432-437.
Polloni, L., F. Lazzarotto, A. Toniolo, G. Ducolin, and A. Muraro. 2013. What do school
personnel know, think and feel about food allergies? Clin Transl Allergy 3(1):39.
Romano, A., M. Di Fonso, F. Giuffreda, G. Papa, M. C. Artesani, M. Viola, A. Venuti, V.
Palmieri, and P. Zeppilli. 2001. Food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis: Clinical
and laboratory findings in 54 subjects. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 125(3):264-272.
Turner, P. J., J. L. Baumert, K. Beyer, R. J. Boyle, C. H. Chan, A. T. Clark, R. W. Crevel, A.
DunnGalvin, M. Fernandez-Rivas, M. H. Gowland, L. Grabenhenrich, S. Hardy, G. F.
Houben, J. O’B Hourihane, A. Muraro, L. K. Poulsen, K. Pyrz, B. C. Remington, S.
Schnadt, R. van Ree, C. Venter, M. Worm, E. N. Mills, G. Roberts, and B. K. BallmerWeber. 2016. Can we identify patients at risk of life-threatening allergic reactions to
food? Allergy 71(9):1241-1255.
Wang, J., M. C. Young, and A. Nowak-Wegrzyn. 2014. International survey of knowledge of
food-induced anaphylaxis. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 25(7):644-650.

3
Prevalence

Overall, food allergy has been estimated to cost $24.8 billion annually
in the United States, including direct medical costs and costs borne by the
family (Gupta et al., 2013a). To determine more accurate estimates of cost
and to prioritize efforts, accurate prevalence1 data are needed. Prevalence
data also are important in helping to identify relationships between risk
determinants and food allergies in specific populations. Various surveys of
pediatricians and family practitioners, school teachers, school nurses, and
the general public generally agree that the prevalence of food allergy in chil­
dren has been increasing over the past two decades. A Data Brief published
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in 2013 (Jackson
et al., 2013) based on the National Health Interview Survey supports this
notion (see Figure 3-1), but the true prevalence of food allergy in the past,
or even the present, is uncertain and difficult to ascertain.
The term “food allergy” is often misunderstood and misused by the
public and also by health care providers and researchers (see “Food Allergy
Misconceptions” in Chapter 2), leading to inflated figures of prevalence
reported from population-based surveys, ranging from 10 percent to 30
percent depending on the rigor of the questionnaires used. Even the defini­
tion of “food allergy” is not uniform (see “Commonly Accepted Defini­
tions” in Chapter 2).
Unfortunately, no simple laboratory tests can be used to diagnose
food allergy, especially non-immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated allergic reac­
1 Prevalence is the proportion of a population who have a specific characteristic (e.g., illness)
in a given time period.

59

60

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

FIGURE 3-1 Increased prevalence of food and skin allergies in children ages 0 to
17 years, 1997-2011.
NOTES: Food allergy prevalence: Estimated based on an affirmative response to the
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) question: “During the past 12 months,
has your child had any kind of food or digestive allergy?”
Respiratory allergy prevalence: Estimated based on affirmative responses to either
of the two NHIS question(s): “During the past 12 months, has your child had hay
fever?” and “During the past 12 months, has your child had any kind of respira­
tory allergy?”
Skin allergy prevalence: Estimated based on an affirmative response to the NHIS
question: “During the past 12 months, has your child had eczema or any kind of
skin allergy?”
a Significant increasing linear trend for food and skin allergy from 1997-1999 to
2009-1011.
SOURCES: CDC/NCHS, National Health Interview Survey, NCHS Data Brief, May
2013 (Jackson et al., 2013).

tions. Instead, physicians must rely on a combination of medical history,
food-specific skin prick test (SPT) and/or food-specific serum IgE (sIgE)
results, and/or oral food challenges2 (OFCs) (preferably blinded) in order
to accurately diagnose a food allergy (see Chapter 4). In a research setting,
the gold standard to measure food allergy as an outcome is double-blind,
placebo-controlled OFC (DBPCOFC). However, using such an approach in
2 There are three types of oral food challenges (OFCs) depending on the protocol. An open
OFC is one where the food is in its natural form; a single-blind OFC is one where the food
is masked from the patient’s perspective so less patient bias occurs because of anxiety; a
double-blind, placebo-controlled OFC involves masking the tested allergen and feeding it or
indistinguishable placebo randomly without the patient or observer knowing if the allergen
or placebo is being tested.

61

PREVALENCE

large population-based studies to ascertain prevalence is impractical, very
labor-intense, and extremely expensive, and is therefore almost never done.
The first real attempt to assess food allergy prevalence in the United States
was conducted in 1987 (Bock, 1987). Although the study might be limited
by selection bias and the small number of subjects, the use of OFC make
this a landmark study.
This chapter addresses the difficulties inherent in attempting to ascer­
tain the true prevalence of food allergy and the strength of the evidence
based on the design of various trials. It summarizes current knowledge
about IgE-mediated food allergy prevalence data in the United States and
abroad. Given the complexity of diagnosing food allergy in populationbased studies, both the prevalence of food sensitization (i.e., by SPT or
serum IgE concentrations) and food allergy (i.e., the presence of clinical
allergy as documented by an unequivocal clinical history and supportive
laboratory studies or OFC) are presented. The prevalence of food allergies
resulting from sensitization to the food and systemic reactions involving
the skin, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, and/or cardiovascular
system will be considered. Prevalence data based on systematic reviews
and meta-analyses from the United States and Europe are presented first,
followed by data from individual studies in all countries, where available.
It should be noted that the vast majority of data on the prevalence of food
allergy has been ascertained in the pediatric population, often children in
the first decade of life. Recommendations for data collection and analysis
to improve the prevalence estimates for food allergy are included at the end
of the chapter, along with research needs.
APPROACH TO LITERATURE REVIEW
The primary resources for this chapter on prevalence were derived from
the 2010 National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases/National
Institutes of Health (NIAID/NIH)-supported Guidelines for the Diagnosis
and Management of Food Allergy in the United States and its associated
systematic reviews3 (based on 51 publications) (Boyce et al., 2010; Chafen
et al., 2010; Rona et al., 2007), and the 2014 European Academy of
Allergy & Clinical Immunology’s (EAACI’s) Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis
Guidelines: Diagnosis and Management of Food Allergy and its associated

3 According to the Cochrane Collaboration, “a systematic review is a review of a clearly
formulated question that uses systematic and explicit methods to identify, select, and critically
appraise relevant research, and to collect and analyze data from the studies that are included in
the review” (Moher et al., 2009). Statistical methods are often used to analyze and summarize
the results of the studies included in the review.

62

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

systematic review and meta-analysis4 (based on 65 publications based on
50 primary studies) (Nwaru et al., 2014). In addition, searches of EMBASE
and Medline were selectively performed to identify studies and reports in
the literature since 2012 (see Appendix B for literature search strategy).
Meta-analyses, systematic reviews, and population-based or cohort preva­
lence studies were included. The summary of the findings of the individual
studies and systematic reviews and meta-analysis used are presented in
Appendix B.
DIFFICULTIES IN ASCERTAINING FOOD ALLERGY PREVALENCE
A variety of methodologies have been employed in an attempt to deter­
mine the prevalence of food allergy in various populations. Implementing
designs and interpreting results from studies on food allergy prevalence
have a number of challenges; some are commonly encountered within
other research fields and others are unique to the field of food allergy. For
example, the type of food allergy being assessed and the methodology used
to assess it can have major impacts on the outcome. In this Chapter, preva­
lence figures will reflect IgE-mediated food allergies (except where otherwise
noted), not non-IgE-mediated disorders. Pollen-associated food allergy is
considered a form of IgE-mediated food allergy that typically results in oral
and pharyngeal pruritus and mild edema. Pollen-associated food allergy
occurs in some patients with allergic rhinitis when ingesting certain raw
fruits, vegetables, tree nuts or peanuts. Pollen-associated food allergy5 is
the result of sensitization to airborne pollen allergens that cross-react with
homologous proteins in plant-derived foods. Ingesting the plant-derived
foods elicits symptoms (Kazemi-Shirazi et al., 2000). With 47 to 70 percent
of patients with allergic rhinitis reporting such symptoms (Katelaris, 2010),
this form of food allergy could account for a food allergy prevalence of 5
to 19 percent in some regions (Sicherer, 2011). Also, the form of a food
used in an OFC can affect the prevalence of food allergy (Osborne et al.,
2011). Table 3-1 lists the challenges and below is a description of a selected
number.

4 Meta-analysis refers to the use of statistical techniques in a systematic review that are used
to integrate the results of included studies.
5 The homologous food allergens are generally heat-labile and susceptible to gastric diges­
tion, thus limiting symptoms primarily to the oropharynx (Wang, 2013). Examples of al­
lergenic pollens (and cross-reacting foods) that might result in pollen-associated food allergy
include birch tree (apple, carrot, hazelnut, etc.), ragweed (melons and bananas), and grass
pollens (tomatoes and strawberries).

63

PREVALENCE

TABLE 3-1 Factors Affecting the Accuracy of Prevalence Surveys
Methodologies

History only versus history + laboratory data (SPT and/or serum
IgE) versus history + laboratory data + physician diagnosis
versus history + oral food challenge versus history + double-blind
placebo-controlled oral food challenges.

Food challenge
material

Cooked/baked versus raw food.

Selection bias

Selected cohort (e.g., allergy clinic based versus birth cohort) or
unselected cohort.

Nonparticipation bias

Those affected are more likely to participate.

Timing of survey

Children “outgrow” many food allergies; adults may acquire food
allergies late; varies with specific food being investigated (e.g., milk
versus shrimp).

Definition

Pollen-associated food allergy, fairly frequent compared to classic
generalized immediate food allergies.

Geographical region

Westernized countries tend to have greater prevalence of food
allergies than less well developed countries.

Statistical analyses

Methods employed to handle missing data and nonparticipation.

Selection Bias and Methodologies
Food allergy prevalence studies are conducted either on general popula­
tions or on specific cohorts (e.g., hospital cohort of individuals with signs of
food allergy). Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages. Earlier
prevalence studies often incorporated selected cohorts from hospital-based
or allergy practices and extrapolated the results to the general population,
which typically led to inflated prevalence figures. Population-based sur­
veys are often employed given the ease of administration and an ability to
incorporate large numbers of subjects at relatively low cost. Although tens
of thousands of individuals can be included in such surveys, these studies
rely on self-reporting of specific food allergies, or “perceived prevalence,”
which uniformly results in higher prevalence rates than do studies incorpo­
rating more rigorous diagnostic methods. For example, the NIAID/NIH­
supported Guidelines noted a self-report rate of food allergy in adults of 13
percent compared to a rate of 3 percent when food allergy was confirmed
by DBPCOFCs (Boyce et al., 2010). More recent surveys have attempted

64

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

to use progressively more extensive questionnaires, inclusion of IgE testing
(food-specific SPT and/or serum IgE levels), and rigorous statistical methods
in an attempt to derive a more accurate picture of true prevalence.
In this chapter, studies reporting prevalence figures from questionnaires
only have generally been excluded unless the investigators appropriately
corrected for inherent biases or the study provided insights related to geo­
graphic or ethnic variation. Also, only population-based studies have been
included as evidence.
Nonparticipation Bias
Even with increased rigor, such surveys are likely flawed by uninten­
tional selection bias. For example, families and individuals affected by
food allergy are more likely than unaffected families to participate in and
complete a study involving extensive questionnaires and testing, leading
to falsely elevated prevalence rates of food allergy. To minimize such bias,
some investigators are now attempting to adjust for “nonresponse” bias.
In the Surveying Prevalence of Food Allergy in All Canadian Environments
study, Soller et al. telephoned 17,337 households, of which 14,113 were
reached (Soller et al., 2015). Of this total, 5,734 households (representing
15,022 individuals) completed the full survey instrument, a 45 percent par­
ticipation rate, which is a rate similar to that seen in other recent studies.
An additional 524 households (4 percent) refused to answer the full ques­
tionnaire but agreed to answer an abbreviated form, and 6,504 households
(51 percent) answered the phone but refused to provide any information.
The self-reported prevalence of food allergy among the full participants
was 6.4 percent (95% confidence interval [CI]: 6.0%-6.8%), which was
significantly greater than the 2.1 percent (95% CI: 1.4%-2.9%) prevalence
reported by those answering the abbreviated questionnaire. This study
clearly shows that when assessing the outcome of prevalence surveys, it is
essential to determine the percentage of individuals randomly selected who
participated in the study, the percentage who dropped out before comple­
tion, and whether the rate of food allergy in those dropping out differed
from those completing the trial.
Timing of Survey
It also is essential to note the timing of the evaluation and the type
of food involved, as a survey of young children will yield a much higher
prevalence of allergy to foods such as cow milk, egg, soy, or wheat than a
survey conducted in the same children at age 10 years because the majority
of young children will outgrow these food allergies.

65

PREVALENCE

FOOD ALLERGY PREVALENCE IN THE
UNITED STATES AND EUROPE
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses have become increasingly impor­
tant for addressing a variety of questions in health care and disease preva­
lence. International guidelines have evolved over the past decade to improve
the quality of systematic reviews, such as the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) (Moher et al., 2009).
More recently the PRISMA-P (Protocols) contains a checklist of 17 items
considered to be essential and lists minimal components of a systematic
review or meta-analysis protocol (Shamseer et al., 2015). Relatively few
systematic reviews in the literature have incorporated all aspects of the
PRISMA-P checklist. In this report, systematic reviews have been assessed
based on the PRISMA checklist.
Based on a meta-analysis by Rona (Rona et al., 2007) and systematic
reviews by the RAND Corporation (Chafen et al., 2010) and Zuidmeer
(Zuidmeer et al., 2008), the NIAID/NIH-sponsored Guidelines (Boyce et
al., 2010) reported that the prevalence of food allergy in the United States
and several European countries was 12 to 13 percent by self-report, but
only 3 percent when confirmed by laboratory studies and DBPCOFCs.
As depicted in Table 3-2, several foods were analyzed individually, with
marked differences dependent upon the stringency of the diagnostic crite­
ria used. In general, the food challenge-proven prevalence of food allergy
appears to be about one-quarter to one-third the rate of self-reported food
allergy by questionnaire.
In 2012, the European Food Safety Authority published a review of
the prevalence data in Europe (EFSA, 2013). In many studies prevalence
was self-reported and, when OFC were conducted, protocols varied sub­
stantially. This work was not peer-reviewed so its findings are not included
in this report. One of the EAACI systematic reviews and meta-analyses
reviewed studies published from January 2000 through September 2012 on
food allergy prevalence in Europe of eight foods or food groups (cow milk,
egg, peanut, tree nuts, wheat, soy, fish, and shellfish) (Nwaru et al., 2014).
Their analysis included only systematic reviews, meta-analyses, cohort,
case-control, cross-sectional, and routine health care studies. The authors
also analyzed the risk of bias in the studies using a modified relevant version
of the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme quality assessment tool (http://
www.casp-uk.net). Overall, 65 publications were reviewed representing 50
studies of which 27 were cross-sectional studies, 17 cohort studies, 3 sys­
tematic reviews, and 3 case-control studies. Only one study had an evidence
grading of “strong” and the rest had a “moderate” grading. Although the

0.6
Not estimated

3
0.9

Milk
(%)
1
0.3

Egg
(%)
0.6
0.3

Fish
(%)
1.2
Not estimated

Crustacean
shellﬁsh
(%)
0-4.1
0.1-4.3

Tree nuts
(%)
0.2-1.3
0-0.5

Wheat
(%)

SOURCE: Nwaru et al., 2014.

Diagnostic Criteria
Self-report
Oral food challenge

0.4
0.2

Peanut
(%)
6
0.6

Milk
(%)
2.5
0.2

Egg
(%)
2.2
0.1

Fish
(%)

1.3
0.1

Shellﬁsh
(%)

1.3
0.5

Tree nuts
(%)

3.6
0.1

Wheat
(%)

0-0.6
0-0.7

Soy
(%)

Not estimated
0.3

Soy
(%)

TABLE 3-3 Prevalence (Percent) of Food Allergy to Various Foods Ascertained by Self-Report or Oral Food
Challenge (Open Challenge or DBPCOFC)

SOURCE: Boyce et al., 2010.

Diagnostic Criteria
Self-report
Oral food challenge

Peanut
(%)

TABLE 3-2 Prevalence (Percent) of Food Allergy to Various Foods Ascertained by Self-Report or Oral Food
Challenge

66

PREVALENCE

67

42 studies included in the meta-analysis showed considerable heterogeneity,
the authors ascertained overall lifetime prevalence estimates (see Table 3-3).
The perceived prevalence rates of food allergies in the EAACI Guidelines
were slightly higher than those noted in the NIAID/NIH-supported Guide­
lines, but the challenge-proven prevalence rates were generally lower. As
noted in the NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines, the prevalence of allergy to
milk and egg were more common in young children, while the prevalence
rates to peanut, tree nuts, fish and shellfish tended to be higher in adults.
The authors caution about interpreting the results of this report because
participation rates varied widely across the studies (17.3 to 99.5 percent)
and in several studies no information was provided on participation rates.
More recently, two systematic reviews on the prevalence of specific
foods have been published: soy (Katz et al., 2014) and tree nuts (McWilliam
et al., 2015). Katz et al. (2014) included 40 studies published between 1909
and 2013 on soy allergy in their systematic review and meta-analysis out of
357 potential studies initially identified. In addition, they judged the quality
of the publications using the GRADE scoring system (Atkins et al., 2004).
The majority of the studies were cross-sectional or cohort studies with
moderate to low quality methodological design and evident bias largely due
to insufficient sample size, patients’ countries of origin, and the length of
time followed in longitudinal studies (follow-up data collection is impor­
tant because the prevalence of food allergy changes with age). The authors
calculated the prevalence of soy allergy in the general population based on
self-reporting to be 0.2 percent (95% CI: 0.0%-0.3%). Based on OFC out­
comes, the prevalence in the general population was 0.27 percent (95% CI:
0.1%-0.44%) and in patients referred to centers for evaluation of allergy,
1.9 percent (95% CI: 1.1%-2.7%). The prevalence of sensitization based
on positive SPT results was 0.1 percent (95% CI: 0%-0.2%) in the general
population and 12.7 percent (95% CI: 5.8%-16.7%) in referred patients. In
11 studies where participants had both OFCs and SPTs or sIgE performed,
only 11.2 percent of sensitized patients reacted to soy following ingestion.
Interestingly, of 1,430 infants younger than age 6 months identified in
three studies, only 0.1 percent (2 infants) likely had soy allergy, suggesting
that the prevalence of soy allergy is much lower than presently believed.
However, it should be noted that 9 out of the 11 studies were conducted in
Europe, 1 was conducted in Israel), and none was conducted in the United
States, where the prevalence of soy allergy is believed to be higher.
McWilliam et al. performed a systematic review and meta-analysis on
the prevalence of tree nut allergy, which was defined as allergy to almond,
Brazil nut, cashew, hazelnut, macadamia nut, pecan, pistachio, or wal­
nut (McWilliam et al., 2015). The authors identified 36 studies published
between January 1996 and December 2014. The majority of studies were in
children (24 of the 36 studies identified) and from European countries (18

68

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

from Europe, 8 from the United Kingdom, and 5 from the United States).
Studies reporting tree nut allergy based on self-report, allergic sensitization
(skin tests and/or serum IgE to individual tree nuts), food challenges (OFC
or DBPCOFC) or convincing clinical histories were considered eligible for
inclusion. In an attempt to reduce selection bias, only population-based
cross-sectional and cohort studies were included. Studies on selected patient
groups or those performed in a hospital or allergy clinic settings were
excluded. In assessing the quality of the studies included in the analysis,
28 studies were graded as moderate and 8 were graded as poor due to par­
ticipation rates, objectivity of outcomes, and study design. In seven studies
using OFCs or recent convincing history, plus evidence of tree nut–specific
IgE to define nut allergy, the overall prevalence of tree nut allergy ranged
from 0 to 1.6 percent. In nine studies using less rigorous criteria, namely
self-reported allergy with physician diagnosis or evidence of sensitization
(positive skin tests or specific IgE to tree nuts), the overall probable preva­
lence of tree nut allergy was calculated to be 0.05 to 4.9 percent. The major­
ity of studies were based on self-reporting of tree nut allergy and yielded
an overall prevalence range of 0.18 to 8.9 percent in adults and 0.0 to 3.8
percent in children. The authors noted regional differences in the prevalence
of tree nut allergies, with northern European countries reporting the high­
est rates, largely due to pollen-associated food allergy. [Pollen-associated
food allergy in northern Europe is due primarily to cross-reactivity with
a homologous pollen protein (Bet v 1) in patients with allergic rhinitis to
birch pollen.] The most common tree nut allergy reported in the European
studies was hazelnut allergy, accounting for 17 to 100 percent of all tree
nut allergies, whereas walnut (20 to 30 percent of all tree nut allergy) and
cashew (15 to 30 percent) were the most common tree nut allergies reported
in the United States. Brazil nut (24 to 33 percent) was the most common nut
allergy reported in the United Kingdom (McWilliam et al., 2015). Limited
evidence was available to address the question of whether tree nut allergy
has been increasing in prevalence, but as depicted in Figure 3-2, using the
same random digit-dial survey, in the United States (an unselected cohort,
not a national survey) the prevalence of tree nut allergy in children younger
than age 18 years was estimated to have increased significantly from 0.2
percent in 1997 to 1.1 percent in 2008 (Sicherer et al., 2010). In the 1997
survey, 5,300 households (13,534 individuals) participated, of which 188
households (3.6%; 95% CI: 3.1%-4.1%) reported 1 or more individuals
with peanut allergy, tree nut allergy, or both. Race/ethnicity was determined
only from the responding household member. The authors concluded that
heterogeneity in tree nut allergy prevalence in different parts of the world
appears to be significant, but that the limited high-quality data make it
difficult to ascertain the true prevalence of tree nut allergy, especially to
individual tree nuts (McWilliam et al., 2015).

69

PREVALENCE
2.5

2

1.5

1997
2002
2008

1

2013*
0.5

0
Peanut

Tree Nut

Peanut and/or Tree Nut

FIGURE 3-2 Change in the prevalence of peanut and tree nut allergy in children,
United States. Data from an unselected cohort, not a national survey.
SOURCES: *Bunyavanich et al., 2014; Sicherer et al., 2010.

Given the known racial disparity in other atopic disorders such as
asthma, two recent systematic reviews attempted to address the question
of racial disparities of food allergy in the United States. In one report,
the authors were able to analyze 20 out of 645 articles initially identified
(Greenhawt et al., 2013). The analyzed studies used a variety of criteria to
define food allergy, including self-reporting, evidence of IgE sensitization,
discharge codes (i.e., ICD-9), chart reviews, and event-reporting databases.
Although 12 studies suggested that African American children had signifi­
cantly increased odds of food sensitization and allergy, major differences in
methodology and reporting did not permit calculation of pooled estimates
or confirmation of definitive racial or ethnic disparities in food allergy
among African American and white children in the United States. In the
second study, the authors evaluated 27 different surveys representing more
than 450,000 children covering the period from 1988 to 2011 (Keet et al.,
2014). As noted in the previous systematic review, no summary estimates
of food allergy prevalence in the different racial or ethnic groups could be
determined because of the heterogeneity of the surveys.
In summary, both systematic reviews and meta-analyses have examined
questions related to the prevalence of food allergy in the United States and
in other countries. However, limitations in the quality of the data make it
difficult to come to firm conclusions about the prevalence of food allergy.

70

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Recent Population-Based Studies in the United States
No large population-based or unselected cohort studies that include
both laboratory and OFC confirmation of food allergy have been per­
formed in the United States.
A CDC report suggested that 3.9 percent of American children younger
than age 18 years had a food allergy (Branum and Lukacs, 2009). The
authors’ prevalence figure was based on an assessment of cross-sectional
survey data from the 1997-2007 National Health Interview Survey,
the 2005-2006 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES), 1993-2006 National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Sur­
vey (NHAMCS) and the 1998-2006 National Hospital Discharge Survey
(NHDS). These surveys consisted of reports of food allergy and assessments
of serum IgE antibody levels for specific foods, ambulatory care visits, and
hospitalizations. A related CDC analysis (Branum and Lukacs, 2008) used
NHDS data to show an increase in the rate of hospital discharges related
to food allergy (see Figure 3-3).
In 2014, the prevalence of sensitization to food and environmental
allergens was published based on the results from NHANES 2005-2006
data and compared to earlier sensitization rates determined in the previ­
ous NHANES III survey (Salo et al., 2014). NHANES 2005-2006 included

FIGURE 3-3 Change in the rate of food allergy–related hospital discharges in the
United States among children younger than age 18.
a Statistically significant trend.
SOURCES: CDC/NCHS (Branum and Lukacs, 2008).

PREVALENCE

71

10,348 participants from throughout the United States and, and to ensure
adequate samples for subgroup analyses, contained an oversampling of
persons of low income, adolescents ages 12 to 19 years, adults ages 60
years and older, African Americans, and Mexican Americans (see http://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes2005-2006/nhanes05_06.htm [accessed August
31, 2016] for a description of survey design and methods). Of the 1,355
children ages 1 to 5 years, 856 (63.2 percent) were determined to have
had IgE antibody levels to three food allergens: egg, cow milk, and peanut,
and of 8,086 participants, ages 6 years and older, 7,268 (89.9 percent) had
IgE determined for egg, cow milk, peanut, and shrimp. Food-specific IgE
(sIgE) levels ≥0.35 kUA/L were considered positive for sensitization. Each
group also was tested for IgE antibodies to 6 and 15 inhalant allergens,
respectively. Overall, 36.2 percent of children ages 1 to 5 years and 44.6
percent of individuals ages 6 years and older were sensitized to at least one
environmental and/or food allergen. Sensitization to milk and egg were sig­
nificantly greater in the ages 1 to 5 years group (22 percent and 14 percent,
respectively), compared to the age 6 years and older group (5 percent and
3.3 percent, respectively), with a marked decline in the prevalence of sen­
sitization occurring over the first decade of life. The prevalence of peanut
sensitization was similar in the two groups, about 7 percent and 8 percent,
respectively. Among children ages 6 years and older, sensitization to food
allergens was most prevalent in the South, and only peanut sensitization
showed regional differences. In children ages 1 to 5 years, only sIgE levels
to peanut were associated with urbanization. NHANES 2005-2006 data
provide a good snapshot of IgE sensitization to the three most common
food allergens in the United States—egg, cow milk, and peanut—but as
described above, sensitization does not equate with clinical reactivity and so
the actual number of Americans at risk of clinical reactions to these foods
cannot be determined.
In the past 5 years, a few population-based, cross-sectional surveys
have been conducted in an attempt to determine the prevalence and sever­
ity of food allergy in the United States. In one study, administered between
June 2009 and February 2010, Gupta et al. collected data on 40,104
children from U.S. households (Gupta et al., 2011, 2013b); 6,100 were
recruited from a web-enabled panel that was statistically representative
of U.S. households with children and an additional 33,900 were obtained
from an online sample of U.S. households with children that had access to
the Internet. Food allergy was categorized as “convincing” or “confirmed.”
A convincing history was based on the report of one or more allergic symp­
toms after ingesting a food and a confirmed food allergy was considered a
convincing history plus a physician diagnosis with evidence of IgE antibody
testing to the food or a positive OFC. Reportedly, 70.4 percent of children
considered with a food allergy in the analysis had a physician’s diagnosis

72

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

and evidence of sIgE antibodies (47.3 percent were evaluated by SPT and
39.9 percent by serum sIgE levels) or a positive OFC (20.2 percent) (Gupta
et al., 2013b). Overall, complete data were available on 38,480 children
(96 percent), but due to the method of sampling, a rate of nonparticipa­
tion, which could affect selection bias, could not be provided. Based on
this study, the overall prevalence of convincing and confirmed food allergy
in children in the United States was estimated to be 8 percent (95% CI:
7.7%-8.3%), with more than one food allergy reported in 2.4 percent of
all children (95% CI: 2.2%-2.6%), or about one-third of the children with
a reported food allergy (Gupta et al., 2011). The prevalences of reported
allergy to individual foods in the U.S. pediatric population are depicted in
Table 3-4. Severe reactions (defined as reports of anaphylaxis, low blood
pressure, trouble breathing or wheezing, or a combination of vomiting,
angioedema, and coughing) were reported in 38.7 percent of the children
with food allergy, with the odds of severe reactions progressively increasing
with age and peaking in adolescent ages 14 to 17 years. The authors noted
that the odds of having a food allergy were significantly higher among
Asian and African American children compared to Caucasian children,
which is in agreement with the NHANES 2005-2006 data described above.
Although this study provides some insight into the perceived prevalence of
food allergy in children, the survey was not validated and, moreover, results
from a self-reporting survey must be interpreted with caution.
In subsequent publications using data from their 2009-2010 survey,
Gupta et al. evaluated the geographical variability of food allergy in the
United States (Gupta et al., 2012). The odds of having a food allergy was
found to be significantly greater in southern and middle latitudes of the
United States as compared to northern latitudes, suggesting a north-to­
south increase in the prevalence of food allergy. Interestingly, this finding
is in contrast to an analysis of food-related admissions to U.S. emergency
departments based on the NHAMCS data for emergency department visits
to noninstitutional hospitals from 1993 to 2005 (Rudders et al., 2010),
which suggested that acute food-allergic reactions are higher in northeast­
ern regions as compared to southern regions. Similarly, a survey of epineph­
rine auto-injector prescriptions, used as a partial surrogate for food allergy,
indicated a strong north-south gradient, with the highest prescription rates
found in New England (Camargo et al., 2007). Gupta et al. (2012) also
reported that the prevalence of food allergy was higher in urban centers
compared to rural areas, 9.8 percent versus 6.2 percent, respectively, with
peanut allergy being the most prevalent in urban centers and milk the
most prevalent in rural areas (Gupta et al., 2012). There appeared to be a
direct correlation between the density of the population in an area and the
prevalence of food allergy, but no difference in severe food allergy based
on urban versus rural status or latitude.

2

SOURCE: Gupta et al., 2011.

Prevalence

Peanut
(%)

1.7

Milk
(%)
0.8

Egg
(%)
0.5

Fish
(%)
1.4

Shellﬁsh
(%)
1.0

Tree nuts
(%)

0.4

Wheat
(%)

0.4

Soy
(%)

TABLE 3-4 Prevalence of Food Allergy to Various Foods Ascertained by Convincing History Plus a Physician
Diagnosis with Evidence of IgE Antibody Testing to the Food or a Positive Oral Food Challenge, Children in the
United States

73

74

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

In an attempt to ascertain the prevalence of peanut allergy in American
children, Bunyavanich et al. used data from the Viva Project’s unselected
observational birth cohort to determine the frequency of the allergy in chil­
dren ages 7 to 10 years (Bunyavanich et al., 2014). The study of 2,128 chil­
dren was designed to examine maternal dietary and other factors that could
influence their child’s health. Overall, 1,277 children underwent a midchildhood visit following their baseline visit in early childhood. Of these
children, 616 (29 percent of the original cohort) had serum peanut-specific
IgE antibody levels measured. Children who returned for the mid-childhood
visit tended to be from a higher socioeconomic status than children who
failed to follow up, but parental atopy6 was comparable in both groups.
Various criteria for diagnosing peanut allergy to determine prevalence in
this cohort were provided: self-reported peanut allergic reactions—4.6 per­
cent; peanut allergy based on serum IgE sensitization (IgE ≥0.35 kUA7/L;
as used in NHANES 2005-2006)—5.0 percent; peanut-IgE + prescription
for epinephrine auto-injector—4.9 percent; peanut-IgE ≥14 kUA/L—2.9
percent; and peanut-IgE ≥14 kUA/L + prescription for epinephrine auto­
injector—2.0 percent. Although less than one-third of the children in the
original cohort were evaluable and diagnoses were not established by OFC,
OCF data suggested a higher prevalence of peanut allergy, i.e., 2.0 percent,
than previously reported in the United States. The authors noted that this
study was conducted in the northeast, which other studies suggest tends to
have higher rates of peanut allergy than other regions in the United States
(Salo et al., 2014).
In summary, since the systematic review and meta-analysis published
by the RAND Group in 2010 suggesting that food allergy in the United
States affects more than 2 percent and less than 10 percent of the popula­
tion (Chafen et al., 2010), attempts to define the prevalence of food allergy
in the U.S. population have been confined to self-reports with variable
confirmatory evidence in two large cohort studies and information from
the NHANES 2005-2006 survey, but no large prospective studies involv­
ing confirmatory food challenges have been conducted. Based on this more
recent evidence, it is likely that 3.9 to 8 percent of the U.S. population
ages 18 years and younger is affected by food allergy (Branum and Lukacs,
2009; Gupta et al., 2011), but regional and racial differences are likely.
Well-designed population-based studies are needed.

6 The genetic tendency to develop the classic allergic diseases—atopic dermatitis, allergic
rhinitis (hay fever), and asthma.
7 Kilo units of allergen-specific IgE.

75

PREVALENCE

Recent Population-Based Studies in Europe
In 2005, the European Union launched the EuroPrevall Surveys, a
series of multinational epidemiological surveys aimed at determining the
prevalence of food allergy in children and adults across Europe. These
surveys were performed as multicenter, cross-sectional studies in general
populations with case-control studies nested within the surveys. Studies
were performed in children ages 7 to 10 years and adults between ages 20
to 54 years in the eight centers representing different social and climatic
regions in Europe (Kummeling et al., 2009). Participants for these studies
were selected in stages. The first stage involved community-based surveys
using a short questionnaire to collect basic information on adverse reactions
to foods. The sampling for these surveys was not random, but was based
on established criteria. Surveys needed to be administered in areas with pre­
existing boundaries that had total populations of at least 200,000 people
and had current registries that could be used to sample children ages 7 to
10 years and adults ages 20 to 54 years. Each center targeted a population
of about 3,000 respondents, and attempts were made to determine and code
reasons for nonresponse. In the second stage, all those in the first stage who
indicated some type of adverse reaction to priority foods and a random
selection of those reporting no reaction completed a detailed questionnaire
and provided a blood sample to determine IgE sensitization. In the third
stage, all those who indicated a reaction to a food and demonstrated IgE
antibodies to the food were invited for a full clinical evaluation, including
a standardized DBPCOFC. The study excluded those with a history of
anaphylaxis, which could lead to a small error. However, conducting oral
challenges in such individuals raises ethical concerns. Aside from this limita­
tion, EuroPrevall and its protocols were well designed. It should be noted,
however, that adherence to and completion of the OFC protocols showed
considerable variability.
To date, the EuroPrevall group has published self-reporting and IgE
sensitization rates on 17,366 adults from the eight centers participating in
the study (Burney et al., 2014). Overall, 21 percent of the adults reported
reactions to particular foods, ranging from 37 percent in the Alpine area
of Europe to less than 2 percent in Northern Europe. Physician-diagnosed
food allergy was 4.4 percent overall and ranged from 7.5 percent in Alpine
and Mediterranean regions to <1 percent in Northern Europe and the
Balkans. The overall prevalence rate of IgE sensitization to all foods was
15.81 percent and ranged from 23.6 percent in the Alpine region to 6.6
percent in the Northern Maritime region. Birch pollen–related foods, i.e.,
hazelnut, peach, apple, carrot, celery, and peach accounted for highest
overall rates of sensitization, from 9.3 percent to 6.3 percent, while egg,
milk, and fish accounted for the lowest rates, 0.86 percent to 0.22 percent,

76

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

with significant regional variation. The prevalence of true food allergy in
European adults remains to be established because DBPCOFCs have not
been performed in adults. However, it was noted that in different regions
of Europe, the prevalence of sensitization to foods is strongly associated
with the prevalence of IgE sensitization to aeroallergens (e.g., birch pollen,
mugwort) whereas sensitization to nonpollen-related foods (e.g., egg, milk,
and fish) is quite rare.
In an expanded multicenter epidemiologic study involving 12 Euro­
pean centers, the EuroPrevall group identified 731 adults from a crosssectional survey of 2,273 participants who reported reactions to hazelnut
occurring 2 hours or less following ingestion (Datema et al., 2015).
Twenty-two individuals had a clear-cut history of anaphylaxis and 124
agreed to undergo a DBPCOFC. In those challenged, 87 (70 percent)
were found to be responders. Birch pollen–driven hazelnut sensitization
(Cor a 1) dominated in most areas, except in Iceland and the Mediterra­
nean areas. Sensitization to the hazelnut storage proteins Cor a 9 and 14
(i.e., those more often associated with generalized allergic reactions) was
significantly more common in children compared to adults, 42.0 percent
versus 5.8 percent, respectively, except in the Netherlands where 90 per­
cent of adults were sensitized to Cor a 9 or 14. No potential explanation
was given for such high rates.
In parallel with the EuroPrevall study, Dutch investigators sought to
determine the difference in reporting and prevalence of food allergy among
community participants in the EuroPrevall study and those referred to a
tertiary allergy center with suspected food allergy (Le et al., 2015). The
investigators confirmed the previously reported discrepancies between selfreported food allergy, food allergy defined by suggestive history plus sup­
porting lab data (sIgE), and food allergy confirmed by DBPCOFC—10.8
percent versus 4.1 percent versus 3.2 percent, respectively. They also found
large differences in self-reported food allergies between the communitybased EuroPrevall cohort and those referred to allergy centers, but sensi­
tization and DBPCOFC-proven food allergies did not differ significantly
between the two groups except for milk and egg allergy. These differ­
ences in clinically confirmed food allergy rates in the community versus
in the allergy centers reinforce the need to use population-based studies
when determining the prevalence of food allergy in the general population
and not to extrapolate from referral populations, particularly when using
questionnaires.
The EuroPrevall group also enrolled a birth cohort of 12,049 from
9 centers throughout Europe between October 2005 and March 2007
(McBride et al., 2012), and followed up at ages 1 year and 2 years. This is
the largest birth cohort reported to date. Overall, 1,928 parents contacted
the study centers about possible adverse food reactions in their children

PREVALENCE

77

and, based on annual follow-up questionnaires, an additional 684 children
were suspected of having potential allergic disease (Schoemaker et al.,
2015). Of this group, 358 children met the criteria to undergo a DBPCOFC
to milk and 248 (69 percent) agreed to at least one food challenge. Fiftyfive children experienced a positive result for an overall incidence of cow
milk allergy of 0.54 percent (95% CI: 0.41%-0.70%). The incidence varied
by country with the highest incidence of cow milk allergy in the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands (1 percent) and the lowest (<0.3 percent)
in Germany, Lithuania, and Greece. Nearly 25 percent of the children
had non-IgE-mediated cow milk allergy, especially those from the United
Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Poland. Of the 32 children with cow milk
allergy who were evaluated 1 year later, 22 (69 percent) were tolerant to
milk, including all those with non-IgE-mediated cow milk allergy and 57
percent of those with the IgE-mediated form of the allergy. This study
reports the lowest incidence of cow milk allergy in recent times, but is sub­
ject to a number of limitations. First, about 30 percent of the children did
not undergo a DBPCOFC. Second, the numbers of eligible infants in each
center who did not participate in the study were not reported so it is not
possible to assess the role of selection bias. Finally, only a limited number
of children underwent a rechallenge to cow milk at 1 year and so the true
proportion of children that became tolerant is less certain.
A similar evaluation of hen egg allergy was conducted in the EuroPrevall
birth cohort (Xepapadaki et al., 2016). Overall, 2,612 children were iden­
tified by parental report (N=1,928) or during annual follow-up question­
naires (N=684) about possible adverse food reactions in their children to
hen egg. Following a standardized evaluation, 298 (27 percent) of the chil­
dren were invited for a DBPCOFC to egg and 172 (58 percent) agreed to be
challenged; 86 (50 percent) experienced a positive challenge to pasteurized
egg powder, for an overall raw incidence of 0.84 percent (95% CI: 0.67%­
1.03%). After adjusting for eligible children who refused the challenge, the
overall incidence of egg allergy in Europe was estimated to be 1.23 percent
(95% CI: 0.98%-1.51%), with the United Kingdom reporting the highest
prevalence at 2.18 percent (95% CI: 1.27%-3.47%) and Greece reporting
the lowest prevalence at 0.07 percent (95% CI: 0.00%-0.37%). This rate of
egg allergy was markedly lower than the recently reported 8.9 percent prev­
alence of egg allergy in a population-based cohort in Australia of infants
age 1 (Osborne et al., 2011), discussed below. Overall, one-half of the egg
allergic children reportedly became tolerant to egg within 1 year following
the initial diagnosis (Xepapadaki et al., 2016). A major limitation of this
study was the large numbers of parents who refused to have their children
challenged and no indication of the number of eligible children from each
site who did not participate, eliminating the possibility of identifying selec­
tion bias. Nevertheless, this study represents the largest multi-center birth

78

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

cohort evaluated for egg allergy and demonstrated a variable rate of egg
allergy across different regions of Europe.
In 2010, a cohort of 2,612 children (ages 11 to 12 years) from three
Swedish municipalities (96 percent participation) were evaluated by ques­
tionnaire and a random subset was further evaluated by skin testing and
DBPCOFC. Overall, 4.8 percent (95% CI: 4%-6%) reported allergy to one
or more common foods, i.e., cow milk, egg, fish, and/or wheat (Winberg
et al., 2015). About one-fourth of the children who underwent clinical
examination (1.4 percent) were diagnosed with a food allergy, and only 0.6
percent were diagnosed after undergoing a DBPCOFC. This study provides
some insight on the prevalence of food allergy in Sweden and further evi­
dence that self-reported rates of food allergy consistently overestimate true
prevalence of food allergy.
A cross-sectional survey was conducted in 19 children’s day care centers
from two Portuguese cities selected following randomization and cluster
analysis (Gaspar-Marques et al., 2014). Questionnaires derived from the
International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood and supple­
mented with questions on food allergy were distributed to 2,228 parents
and returned by 1,225 (55 percent). The median age of the children sam­
pled was 3.5 years; 38.3 percent were ages 0 to 3 years, and 61.7 percent
were ages 4 to 6 years. Parents reported that 10.8 percent (95% CI: 9.1%­
12.6%) of the children ever had a food allergy and 5.7 percent (95% CI:
4.6%-7.2%) currently had a food allergy. Milk (2.8 percent), strawberry
(2.3 percent), chocolate (1.4 percent), egg (1.0 percent) and shellfish (0.7
percent) were the most commonly reported foods. Although no attempt was
made to validate food allergy with laboratory studies or OFC, the preva­
lence of parental-perceived food allergy is considerably lower than that
reported for some countries in the EuroPrevall study, such as Germany (30
percent), Iceland, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands (20 to 22 per­
cent), but similar to those in others, such as Lithuania, Greece, Poland, and
Spain (5 to 8 percent) (McBride et al., 2012). Like many epidemiological
studies on food allergy, the use of parental reporting by questionnaire may
lead to misclassification, which could explain the high perceived prevalence
of allergy to strawberry and chocolate, and selection bias due to the high
rate of nonresponders.
In summary, a variety of studies have been conducted in European
countries to ascertain prevalence of food allergy in various populations
and to various food allergens. In the most ambitious study, the EuroPrevall
Surveys, 8 European centers enrolled about 3,000 individuals each to con­
duct questionnaires, IgE sensitization tests, and DBPCOFC. The results
from DBPCOFCs in children have been published for milk and eggs;
additional prevalence data will be forthcoming. No OFC were performed
in adults. Although these studies provide some insights, inconsistencies

79

PREVALENCE

in the implementation across countries make it difficult to come to firm
generalizations about food allergy prevalence in Europe for children or
for adults.
PREVALENCE OF FOOD ALLERGY IN
OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD
Australia
One of the most comprehensive population-based studies to date
was conducted in Melbourne, Australia, as part of the HealthNuts Study
(Osborne et al., 2011). Importantly this study used a formal sampling frame
to ensure that the study is truly population-representative (Osborne et al.,
2010). Parents of infants between the ages of 11 and 15 months attending
one of 120 immunization clinics were enrolled and a short interview was
conducted with all nonparticipants to assess potential participation bias.
Overall, 3,898 parents were approached and 2,848 (73.1 percent) agreed
to participate; 99.1 percent of the nonparticipants completed the nonpar­
ticipant interview. Of those infants enrolled, 98.4 percent had SPT to four
of five foods (egg, peanut, sesame, shrimp, or cow milk). Any participant
with a detectable wheal size (1mm greater than the negative control) was
invited for an OFC, which was conducted with research staff blinded to
SPT result and history of previous reaction. The challenges were undertaken
irrespective of wheal size or history of previous reaction unless the reactions
occurred in the previous 1 month and predetermined objective stopping cri­
teria were used (Koplin et al., 2012). At the time of OFC, repeat SPT wheal
(i.e., small swelling) diameters 1 mm or greater than the negative control
were considered positive, and 21.0 percent (95% CI: 19.5%-22.5%) were
positive to one or more foods: raw egg—11.8 percent (95% CI: 10.6%­
13.0%); peanut—6.4 percent (95% CI: 5.5%-7.3%); sesame—1.6 per­
cent (95% CI: 1.2%-2.1%); shellfish—0.4 percent (95% CI: 0.2%-0.7%);
and milk—5.6 percent (95% CI: 3.2%-8.0%). More than 90 percent of
infants with a positive SPT to egg, peanut, and/or sesame underwent a
food challenge regardless of skin test size, with an overall prevalence of
challenge-confirmed food allergy among participants of 10.4 percent (95%
CI: 9.3%-11.5%): raw egg—9.0 percent (95% CI: 7.8%-10.0%); pea­
nut—2.9 percent (95% CI: 2.3%-3.6%); and sesame—0.7 percent (95%
CI: 0.4%-1.0%). Of 88 infants reactive to raw egg, 80.3 percent did not
react to 1.1 g of egg protein baked in a cake. Oral food challenges to milk
were not performed, but IgE-mediated type reactions to milk were reported
in 2.7 percent (95% CI: 2.1%-3.4%) of infants. Accounting for differences
among participants and nonparticipants only marginally decreased the esti­
mated prevalence of food allergy, e.g., peanut—2.9 percent (95% CI: 2.3%­

80

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

3.6%) to 3.0 percent (95% CI: 2.4%-3.8%) (Osborne et al., 2011). One of
the greatest strengths of this survey is the diagnosis of food allergy based
on challenge-proven outcomes. Despite the use of such rigorous diagnostic
criteria, the prevalence of food allergy in this population of children age
1 year is the highest reported to date and may reflect the apparent higher
prevalence of allergic disease in Australia or the increasing prevalence of
food allergy worldwide. This cohort, which is now being followed and has
been re-examined at ages 2, 4, 6, and 10 years (Koplin et al., 2015), will
provide interesting insights into the natural history of food allergy.
Africa
Few epidemiologic studies on the prevalence of food allergy have been
performed in other parts of the world. Kung et al. attempted a systematic
review of food allergy in Africa and found very limited information from
11 countries (Kung et al., 2014). No population-based surveys and few
case-controlled cross-sectional studies have been conducted. Most studies
relied on self-reporting and in some cases skin testing in selected popula­
tions. Nevertheless, the investigators concluded that while not common,
food allergy is an increasing problem in several emerging African countries.
A preliminary feasibility study of food sensitization and challenge-proven
food allergy was conducted in Cape Town, South Africa (Basera et al.,
2015). The authors concluded that future studies in this black African
infant cohort will be helpful in determining the prevalence of food sensitiza­
tion and allergy in an African population.
Asia
A systematic review of food allergy in Asia yielded 53 original articles
from Southeast Asia. Of these, 13 were epidemiologic studies and most
had major design limitations resulting in low-grade evidence (Lee et al.,
2013). The overall prevalence of self-reported or questionnaire-based food
allergy in the pediatric population ranged from 3.4 percent to 11.1 percent.
Egg and milk allergy were the most common food allergies in infants and
young children, 0.15 percent to 4.4 percent and 0.33 percent to 3.5 percent,
respectively. Shellfish (crustaceans and mollusks) allergy was the most com­
mon food allergy in older children and adults (reportedly 5.12 percent and
5.23 percent in the Philippines and Singapore, respectively), and it was the
leading cause of anaphylaxis in Southeast Asia. Wheat allergy was report­
edly the leading cause of anaphylaxis in children in Japan, with a prevalence
of 0.37 percent.
A population-based survey of fish allergy in the Philippines, Singapore,
and Thailand was conducted in randomly selected secondary schools using

PREVALENCE

81

structured written questionnaires followed by an extended questionnaire
in those responding positively to the initial survey (Connett et al., 2012).
Overall, 19,966 out of 25,842 initial surveys were returned (11,434 [81.1
percent] from the Philippines, 6,498 [67.9 percent] from Singapore and
2,034 [80.2 percent] from Thailand). The prevalence of a convincing his­
tory of fish allergy was greatest in the Philippines—2.29 percent (95%
CI: 2.02%-2.56%) compared to 0.26 percent (95% CI: 0.14%-0.79%) in
Singapore and 0.29 percent (95% CI: 0.06%-0.52%) in Thailand.
Two cross-sectional studies of food allergy prevalence also have been
conducted in China showing an increase in food sensitization and allergy
prevalence in infants between 1999 and 2009 (Hu et al., 2010). These stud­
ies, however, were small and could be subject to selection bias and therefore
could report a higher level than the actual prevalence.
A cross-sectional survey of adolescents from 34 state elementary schools
in Ankara province in Turkey included an initial survey followed-up by a
phone survey with families that reported a food allergy and then a clini­
cal evaluation of children who had a history compatible with food allergy
following the phone survey (Kaya et al., 2013). Of 11,233 questionnaires
distributed to 6th, 7th, and 8th grade students at the 34 schools, 10,096
(89.9 percent) questionnaires were returned (mean age of students was 12.9
+ 0.9 years) and 1,139 (11.2 percent) reported a food allergy. The parentreported lifetime prevalence of food allergy was 11.3 percent (95% CI:
10.7%-11.9%) and the point prevalence8 was 3.6 percent (95% CI: 3.2%­
3.8%). All children’s families who reported a food allergy and 200 others
who reported no food allergy were contacted by an allergy specialist by
phone. After reviewing the case histories, 133 cases were compatible with a
food allergy and 107 agreed to participate in a clinical evaluation including
SPT, serum IgE levels, open OFC, and in some cases DBPCOFC. Following
clinical evaluation, including OFC, the prevalence of IgE-mediated food
allergy was found to be 0.15 percent, with allergy to peanut (0.05 percent)
and tree nuts (0.05 percent) being the most common. Strengths of this study
include its large sample size and progressive diagnostic evaluation, includ­
ing OFC documentation of food allergy.
In summary, relatively few population-based studies have attempted to
determine the prevalence of food allergy in countries outside of Europe and
the United States. These data have been limited by a number of shortcom­
ings: small sample size, selection bias related to sampling methodology and
low response rates, use of parental reporting of food allergy and/or SPT/
serum IgE levels, and when included, variable OFC methodologies. One
exception is Australia, which has mounted a robust effort to determine

8 The proportion of a population that has the condition at a specific point in time.

82

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

prevalence. Data emerging from this effort will provide valuable insights
into natural history and prevalence.
PREVALENCE OF FOOD ALLERGY–INDUCED ANAPHYLAXIS
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
Umasunthar et al. performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to
determine the incidence of food-induced anaphylaxis in individuals with food
allergy (Umasunthar et al., 2015). The systematic review identified 34 studies,
primarily from North America, Europe, and Australia, out of 2,552 article
titles that could be used to contribute data to the meta-analysis. Study results
showed marked heterogeneity, most likely due to the variation in study popu­
lations, definitions of anaphylaxis used, and data collection methods. In indi­
viduals with food allergy, medically coded food anaphylaxis had an incidence
rate9 of 0.14 per 100 person-years (95% CI: 0.05-0.35). At ages 0 to 19
years, the incidence rate for anaphylaxis in those with food allergy was 0.20
(95% CI: 0.09-0.43) and at ages 0 to 4 years, the authors reported an inci­
dence rate of up to 7.00 per 100 person-years. In food-allergic patients, the
incidence rate of hospital admission due to food anaphylaxis was 0.09 (95%
CI: 0.0-0.67) per 1,000 person-years, with an incidence rate of 0.20 (95%
CI: 0.10-0.43) at ages 0 to 19 years based on eight studies and 0.50 (95% CI:
0.26-0.93) at ages 0 to 4 years based on six studies. The authors concluded
that “the incidence of medically coded anaphylaxis for a food allergic person
is greater than the general population incidence of accidental death, but is
likely to be significantly lower than the incidence of Emergency Depart­
ment attendance due to motor vehicle accidents” (Umasunthar et al., 2015,
p. 1624). The highest rates of medically coded food anaphylaxis and hospital
admissions for food anaphylaxis were seen in preschool children, in contrast
to reports of fatal food anaphylaxis, which are most commonly reported in
adolescents and young adults.
Using the PRISMA guidelines, Umasunthar et al. also performed a sys­
tematic review and meta-analysis to determine the incidence of fatal food
anaphylaxis in individuals with food allergy (Umasunthar et al., 2013). Out
of 2,552 original titles, 13 studies, conducted in North America, Europe,
Australia, Brazil, and Israel, describing a total of 240 fatal food-induced
anaphylactic reactions were included in the analysis. Assuming a food
allergy prevalence rate of 3 percent (3.9 percent in individuals ages 0 to
19 years and 1 percent in those with peanut allergy), meta-analysis of 10
evaluable studies (which had low-grade evidence and a high level of het­
erogeneity) estimates the incidence of fatal food anaphylaxis among those
9 Incidence rate is the number of new cases per population at risk in a given time period.

83

PREVALENCE

with a food-allergy as 1.81 (95% CI: 0.94-3.45) per million person-years
(equivalent to about 25 deaths per year in the United States, assuming an
overall 3 percent prevalence of food allergy), 3.25 (95% CI: 1.73-6.10)
per million person-years in children ages 0 to 19 years, and 2.13 (95% CI:
1.09-4.16) per million person-years in peanut-allergic patients. The inves­
tigators concluded that in all studies examined and in all subgroups evalu­
ated, “the incidence of fatal food anaphylaxis for a food-allergic person is
≥100 times lower than incidence of death due to any accident in the general
population, and at age 0–19, the incidence is ≥10 times lower than the acci­
dental death incidence in the general population” (Umasunthar et al., 2013,
p. 1338). In both the systematic review and meta-analysis by Umasunthar et
al., the level of evidence in the studies reviewed was low due to variations
in case definition of anaphylaxis, methods of data capture, limited informa­
tion about food allergy prevalence in the populations studied, and likely
ascertainment bias across all studies. However, both systematic reviews
suggested a number of risk factors for more severe anaphylactic reactions
that have been noted in previous studies, including individuals with asthma,
previous severe reaction (Bock et al., 2007; Sampson et al., 1992), IgE bind­
ing to a diverse range of sequential epitopes (Flinterman et al., 2008; Lewis
et al., 2005; Shreffler et al., 2004), and deficient platelet-activating factor
acetylhydrolase enzyme activity (Vadas et al., 2008).
A systematic review and meta-analysis of the prevalence of anaphy­
laxis in Europe was conducted by Panesar et al., who identified 49 articles
satisfying their inclusion criteria, but only 3 were suitable for generating
a pooled estimate of anaphylaxis (Panesar et al., 2013). Meta-analysis of
these studies suggested a pooled European anaphylaxis prevalence of 0.3
percent (95% CI: 0.1%-0.5%), with markedly varying estimates of ana­
phylaxis due to food allergy based on individual studies ranging from 0.4
percent to 39.9 percent. In children, cow milk, egg, hazelnut, peanut, kiwi,
and other tree nuts were the most common triggers, and asthma and reac­
tions in pollen-allergic patients occurring in pollen season were identified
as increased risk factors for anaphylaxis.
Studies in the United States
Virtually no studies have been conducted evaluating the prevalence of
food-induced anaphylaxis in the United States. Recently Wood et al. con­
ducted two nationwide, cross-sectional random-digit-dial surveys: a public
survey that included unselected adults and a patient survey that collected
information from household members who reported a reaction to medica­
tions, foods, insect stings, or latex and idiopathic reactions in the previous
10 years (Wood et al., 2014). The public survey included 1,000 adults from
which it was estimated that 5.1 percent (95% CI: 3.4%-6.8%) and 1.6

84

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

percent (95% CI: 0.8%-2.4%) had probable and very likely anaphylaxis,
respectively. In the patient survey 344 of 1,059 respondents reported a his­
tory of anaphylaxis; 31 percent of these reactions were to foods, most com­
monly peanuts, tree nuts, and shellfish. Even though children were included
in the patient survey, it had a significant bias toward an older population
(median age was age 52 years). This age bias likely misrepresented the
relative proportion of anaphylaxis triggers in the overall U.S. population,
probably underestimating foods and overestimating medications. As with
similar such surveys, both studies were limited by recall bias of interview­
ees, potential bias caused by using only a landline sample, and high rates
of nonparticipation that could potentially result in further selection bias.
Other methods to estimate prevalence have been used, such as the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Prob­
lems (ICD)10 (Jerschow et al., 2014). However, ICD codes are considered
inaccurate for determining the prevalence of food-induced anaphylactic
deaths.
In the United States, the National Electronic Injury Surveillance Sys­
tem (NEISS) is an active surveillance system maintained by the Consumer
Product Safety Commission (CPSC) designed to identify consumer productrelated adverse events at emergency departments. The authors of a 2008
pilot study that analyzed NEISS emergency department data to assess food
allergies adverse events concluded that analysis of NEISS data may be a
useful tool for assessing the magnitude and severity of food-allergic events
(Ross et al., 2008).
Studies in Europe
Some European countries have developed Web-based surveillance
systems to gather food related severe reactions data, such as the French
Allergovigilance Network (Moneret-Vautrin et al., 2005) or the European
Anaphylaxis Registry. Between July 2007 and March 2015, 1,970 anaphy­
lactic events in children younger than age 18 years were reported to the
European Anaphylaxis Registry, which consisted of data retrieved from
medical records of referrals to 90 tertiary allergy centers in 10 European
countries (Grabenhenrich et al., 2016). Overall, 1,291 out of 1,970 (66
percent) severe allergic events were due to allergic reactions to food. The
investigators found that milk (N=120) and egg (N=115) were the most com­
mon cause of anaphylaxis in children during the first 2 years of life. Cashew
10 The International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (or
International Classification of Diseases [ICD]) is the international standard diagnostic tool
for epidemiology, health management, and clinical purposes maintained by the World Health
Organization.

85

PREVALENCE

(N=87) and hazelnut (N=86) reactions occurred mostly in preschoolers and
peanut (N=325) occurred at all ages in European children. Grabenhenrich
et al. found that most incidents occurred in private homes (46 percent)
and that one-third of the children had experienced a previous reaction
(Grabenhenrich et al., 2016). Skin symptoms occurred in 92 percent of
children: hives (62 percent), angioedema (53 percent), pruritus (37 percent),
and flushing (29 percent). Gastrointestinal symptoms developed in 45 per­
cent of the reactions: vomiting (overall 27 percent) dominating in the
preschool children, abdominal pain (16 percent), and nausea (overall 15
percent) dominating in adolescents. Overall, 70 percent of anaphylactic
cases due to known factors were due to food allergy, with peanut and milk
being the most common elicitors. Overall, 26 children (1.3 percent) experi­
enced severe life-threatening reactions, mostly to foods, and 5 children died.
This study represents the largest series of anaphylactic reactions reported
in a pediatric population.
In summary, high-quality data on the prevalence of food-induced ana­
phylaxis in the United States and in other countries are lacking. In addi­
tion, it is challenging to make definitive conclusions about prevalence of
anaphylaxis due to heterogeneity in populations, definitions of anaphylaxis
used, and data collection methods. However, mortality due to food-induced
anaphylaxis seems to be low compared to other accidental causes. Still,
monitoring anaphylaxis reactions from food allergies is important not
only to estimate prevalence but for understanding the causes, identifying
interventions, and for bringing the information to patient care and other
educational efforts.
EVIDENCE THAT THE PREVALENCE OF
FOOD ALLERGY IS INCREASING
A few studies have employed consistent methodology over time in
an attempt to determine whether the prevalence of food allergy has been
changing over time. Sicherer et al. performed a random digit-dial telephone
survey in the United States using the same methodology at set intervals
(1997, 2002, and 2008) to determine the prevalence of peanut and tree nut
allergy (Sicherer et al., 2010). In the 2008 study, a total of 5,300 households
(13,534 participants) were surveyed (participation rates, 42 percent versus
52 percent in 2002 and 67 percent in 1997). Overall, peanut allergy, tree
nut allergy, or both were reported in 1.4 percent of participants (95% CI:
1.2%-1.6%) compared with 1.2 percent in 2002 and 1.4 percent in 1997.
The prevalence for adults was 1.3 percent (95% CI: 1.1%-1.6%), which
was not significantly different from the earlier surveys, while the prevalence
of peanut or tree nut allergy for children younger than 18 years of age was
significantly different: 2.1 percent in 2008 (95% CI: 1.6%-2.7%) com­

86

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

pared with 1.2 percent in 2002 and 0.6 percent in 1997. The prevalence of
peanut allergy in children in 2008 was 1.4 percent (95% CI: 1.0%-1.9%)
compared with 0.8 percent in 2002 and 0.4 percent in 1997. Additionally,
the prevalence of childhood tree nut allergy increased significantly across
the survey waves (1.1 percent in 2008, 0.5 percent in 2002, and 0.2 percent
in 1997). However, these studies had a number of limitations, including
self-reporting, increasing awareness, and increasing nonparticipation rates,
which could have led to increasing selection bias and higher prevalence
rates.
As noted above, investigators at the CDC performed a cross-sectional
survey of data from several U.S. databases and concluded that the preva­
lence of food allergy in children younger than age 18 years increased 18
percent from 1997 through 2007 (Branum and Lukacs, 2009). However,
it remains unclear whether this represents a true increase in prevalence or
a difference in awareness and coding. A recent comparison between the
rate of sensitization (sIgE test) to peanut, milk, egg, and shrimp in U.S.
children ages 6 to 19 years from 1988-1994 to 2005-2006 was conducted
based on NHANES data. The analysis found that sensitization did not
increase between 1988 and 1994 (24.3%; 95% CI: 22.1%-26.5%) and
2005-2006 (21.6%; 95% CI: 19.5%-23.7%), except for a trend toward the
increased prevalence to the combination of milk, egg, and peanut among
non-Hispanic blacks (McGowan et al., 2016). Sensitization, however, is not
a good indicator of symptomatic food allergies.
A number of studies from other parts of the world also suggest an
increase in the prevalence of sensitization and allergic reactions to foods.
Three birth cohorts from the Isle of Wight in the United Kingdom were
evaluated for peanut allergy in 1989 (2,181 children age 4), 1996 (1,273
children ages 3 and 4), and 2001-2002 (891 children age 3) (Venter et al.,
2010). Peanut sensitization increased significantly, from 1.3 percent in the
1989 cohort to 3.3 percent (P=0.003) in the 1996 cohort before falling back
to 2.0 percent in the 2001-2002 cohort (P=0.145). Clinical peanut allergy
(based on positive SPT with convincing clinical history or positive OFC in
the latter two cohorts) increased significantly from 0.5 percent in the 1989
cohort to 1.4 percent (P=0.023) in 1996 cohort with a subsequent fall to
1.2 percent in the 2001-2002 cohort (P=0.850). However, in this study,
the cohorts are not totally comparable because the ages and participation
rates varied.
In a cross-sectional survey of grade school children in Montreal, BenShoshan et al. reported a non-significant rise in adjusted peanut allergy
prevalence from 1.34 percent (95% CI: 1.08%-1.64%) in a 2000-2002
cohort to 1.62 percent (95% CI: 1.31%-1.98%) in a 2005-2007 cohort
(Ben-Shoshan et al., 2009).
In summary, although a general perception that food allergy is increas­

87

PREVALENCE

ing exists, especially in westernized countries, very few studies support this
likely change.
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
An accurate assessment of the true prevalence of food allergy and
a determination of whether it is increasing are needed to prioritize food
allergy as a public health problem and ensure that adequate resources are
directed at the problem. Although a general consensus has emerged and
plentiful “soft” data, such as parental reports, surveys of school teachers
and nurses, and reports from general practitioners, suggest that the preva­
lence of food allergy is increasing, few well-designed comprehensive studies
exist to support this notion. Because of the low quality of published preva­
lence data, particularly the use of self-reported data, the true prevalence of
food allergy is likely overestimated in most published studies. Even so, it is
clear that food allergy has become a major health problem in many coun­
tries around the world. The prevalence of atopic dermatitis has increased
dramatically over the past two decades (see Figure 3-1), and this may in
large part account for the rise in food allergy, as children with eczema are
susceptible to sensitization to various allergens, including food, through
the defective and inflamed skin barrier. Figure 3-4 depicts the prevalence of
food allergy based on convincing histories plus laboratory data or OFCs,
primarily in young children, in various countries around the world.
It appears that a few foods, such as milk, egg, peanut and/or tree
nuts, and seafood, comprise the vast majority of allergens responsible for
allergic reactions around the world, and that the likelihood of severe or
fatal reactions due to food allergy in food-allergic individuals is rare, being
less likely than the chance of severe injury or death due to accidents in the
general public.
Good studies on the prevalence of food allergy are very costly and dif­
ficult to perform, often requiring OFCs for accurate diagnosis, which are
time-consuming, potentially dangerous and frequently refused by parents,
and subject to a variety of biases. In general, prevalence data based on
parental surveys or specialty-based practices or hospitals provide the most
inflated estimates, followed by population-based surveys, sensitizationbased studies, and medical history plus sensitization-based studies. Studies
incorporating OFC typically provide the lowest and most accurate assess­
ment of true food allergy prevalence. Population-wide estimates of preva­
lence of food allergy in both children and adults in Europe are available
from the EuroPrevall studies, which encompass questionnaires, testing for
IgE antibodies, and more limited testing with DBPCOFC among children.
In addition, a comprehensive study of infants has been conducted in Aus­
tralia in the HealthNuts Study, which is continuing to follow the infants

88

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

FIGURE 3-4 Prevalence of IgE-mediated food allergy at different age points
younger than the age of 6 in various countries of the world determined by con­
vincing clinical history with evidence of IgE antibodies or by OFC. Countries and
median age of population surveyed posted along x-axis, percentage of food-allergic
children listed on y-axis.
SOURCES: Courtesy of Michael E. Levine, Cape Town, South Africa. Data from
Basera et al., 2015; Bock, 1987; Chen et al., 2011; Eller et al., 2009; Grimshaw
et al., 2015; Hu et al., 2010; Kristinsdottir et al., 2011; Kvenshagen et al., 2009;
Lao-araya and Trakultivakorn, 2012; Osborne et al., 2011; Osterballe et al., 2005;
Venter et al., 2006, 2008.

through childhood. No such population-wide estimates of prevalence exist
in the United States.
Given the difficulty of diagnosing food allergy, the committee recom­
mends that estimation of prevalence of food allergies in general and for
the specific list of priority allergens in the United States be conducted in
a systematic fashion and stratified sampling be used for cost-efficiency,
with frequency-weighting used to obtain population-wide estimates. In the
United States, while some surveys, such as the National Survey of Children’s
Health, are limited to questionnaire data, other surveys, possibly including
the newly launched Environmental Influences on Child Health Outcomes
(ECHO) program, could incorporate more comprehensive assessment of

89

PREVALENCE

food allergies, particularly in children. At this time, such information could
be incorporated into a population survey sampling already in place, such
as NHANES.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The committee recommends that the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention obtain prevalence estimates on food allergy in a
systematic and statistically sound manner. Prevalence should be
assessed in a systematic fashion in a sufficiently large population,
with consideration given to using stratified sampling for cost-effi­
ciency, with frequency-weighting used to obtain population-wide
estimates. Prevalence estimates should be conducted in both chil­
dren and adults and in groups defined by race, ethnicity, and
socioeconomic status to determine differences in diagnosis and
prevalence within these subgroups. To support population risk
assessments, the committee also recommends that the dietary intake
history of those reporting food allergy be compared to those who
do not, particularly for the specific foods of interest.
Although a new study design (or the use of other data sur­
veillance systems) is possible, the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) is a feasible option to systemati­
cally examine the prevalence of food allergy by collecting data on
self-reported food allergies, food-specific immunoglobulin E (sIgE)
concentrations, food-specific skin prick test (SPT) results, and oral
food challenge (OFC) results.11
Specific suggestions for use of NHANES (or other data surveil­
lance systems) include
•

•

Oversample the population of children ages 0 to 6 years,
due to the higher prevalence of food allergy in this group
and the fact that environmental exposures at this age might
affect food allergy development.
Consistently incorporate questions on food allergy diagno­
sis as well as intake of common food allergens into ques­
tionnaires to capture point prevalence, change in prevalence

11 The gold standard OFC is an expensive method and must be administered in a clinic and
under supervision of a trained physician. The testing sequence, therefore, is meant to lead
to a population sample that is enriched with individuals reporting food allergies and that
minimizes cost and effort.

90

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

•

•
•

•

•

•
•

of self-reported food allergies over time, and dietary infor­
mation on intake of common allergens.
Perform assays of blood specimens for serum food allergenspecific immunoglobulin (IgE), concentrations to obtain
population estimates of prevalence of allergen sensitization
and assess changes in prevalence over time.
Invite a stratified sample of participants enriched with indi­
viduals reporting food allergies to undergo food-specific
SPT during the examination component of the survey.
Invite a smaller subsample of participants to undergo dou­
ble blinded placebo-controlled OFCs. This sample should
be enriched with individuals reporting food allergies and/
or positive SPT or IgE antibody tests.
Elicit reasons for any nonparticipation in SPT or OFC, par­
ticularly whether the individual has had prior testing and a
diagnosed food allergy. If possible, obtain medical records
containing such test results.
Obtain population-wide estimates of self-reported food
allergies, IgE concentrations, positive SPTs, and positive
OFCs through weighted analyses using stratified sampling
weights (e.g., as is routinely used in NHANES analyses).
Establish the sensitivity and specificity of various diagnos­
tics as compared to the OFC.
Use a diagnostic challenge with progressive series of doses
in the subsample undergoing OFCs to establish prevalence
of food allergy. Also include testing at a lower dose to
validate population thresholds proposed for food labeling
purposes.
RESEARCH NEEDS

In addition to sound information about the true prevalence of food
allergy, the committee concluded that better methods to collect information
about anaphylaxis reactions are needed. In addition, estimates of the vari­
ous costs of food allergy are needed. For example, the CDC has developed
tools to estimate the costs associated with some chronic diseases, such as
arthritis. Medical expenditures for managing food allergy place financial
burdens on society, as well as on the individuals affected and their caregiv­
ers. Additional costs relate to quality of life, productivity in school or at
work, and food recalls. In addition, data from a national survey of caregiv­
ers of food-allergic children suggests considerable socioeconomic disparities
in the economic impact of childhood food allergy. For instance, children
in the lowest income stratum incurred 2.5 times the amount of emergency

91

PREVALENCE

department and hospitalization costs related to their food allergies than did
higher-income children (Bilaver et al., 2016). Estimates on cost burden are
necessary for prioritizing research and resources, and for effectively advo­
cating for implementation of practices and policies that will reduce costs.
The accuracy of the estimates will partially depend on collecting better
prevalence data, as described in the recommendation above.
The following research needs are warranted to improve data on severe
reactions and on cost estimates:
•

•

Evaluate various methods of collecting national data on food
allergy severe reactions such as by leveraging the existing surveil­
lance systems (e.g., NHANES or the National Electronic Injury
Surveillance System) or by developing a Web-based reporting sys­
tem for anaphylaxis in the community.
Collect and analyze data to estimate the economic and social costs
of food allergy based on current prevalence of both mild and
severe reactions and on objective measures of costs, such as data
on medical expenses and time lost from school and work. Collect
these data on different ethnicities and socioeconomic strata. The
costs to industry due to food recalls and implementation of allergen
control strategies also should be estimated.
REFERENCES

Atkins, D., D. Best, P. A. Briss, M. Eccles, Y. Falck-Ytter, S. Flottorp, G. H. Guyatt, R. T.
Harbour, M. C. Haugh, D. Henry, S. Hill, R. Jaeschke, G. Leng, A. Liberati, N. Magrini,
J. Mason, P. Middleton, J. Mrukowicz, D. O’Connell, A. D. Oxman, B. Phillips, H. J.
Schunemann, T. Edejer, H. Varonen, G. E. Vist, J. W. Williams, Jr., S. Zaza, and G. W.
Group. 2004. Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ
328(7454):1490.
Basera, W., M. Botha, C. L. Gray, N. Lunjani, A. S. Watkins, C. Venter, K. J. Allen, C. Hlela,
H. J. Zar, and M. E. Levin. 2015. The South African food sensitisation and food allergy
population-based study of IgE-mediated food allergy: Validity, safety, and acceptability.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 115(2):113-119.
Ben-Shoshan, M., R. S. Kagan, R. Alizadehfar, L. Joseph, E. Turnbull, Y. St Pierre, and A. E.
Clarke. 2009. Is the prevalence of peanut allergy increasing? A 5-year follow-up study
in children in Montreal. J Allergy Clin Immunol 123(4):783-788.
Bilaver, L. A., K. M. Kester, B. M. Smith, and R. S. Gupta. 2016. Socioeconomic disparities in
the economic impact of childhood food allergy. Pediatrics 137(5)e20153678.
Bock, S. A. 1987. Prospective appraisal of complaints of adverse reactions to foods in children
during the first 3 years of life. Pediatrics 79(5):683-688.
Bock, S. A., A. Munoz-Furlong, and H. A. Sampson. 2007. Further fatalities caused by
anaphylactic reactions to food, 2001-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 119(4):1016-1018.

92

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Boyce, J. A., A. Assa’ad, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, H. A. Sampson, R. A. Wood, M. Plaut,
S. F. Cooper, M. J. Fenton, S. H. Arshad, S. L. Bahna, L. A. Beck, C. Byrd-Bredbenner,
C. A. Camargo, Jr., L. Eichenfield, G. T. Furuta, J. M. Hanifin, C. Jones, M. Kraft, B. D.
Levy, P. Lieberman, S. Luccioli, K. M. McCall, L. C. Schneider, R. A. Simon, F. E. Simons,
S. J. Teach, B. P. Yawn, and J. M. Schwaninger. 2010. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: Report of the NIAID-sponsored expert
panel. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(6 Suppl):S1-S58.
Branum, A. M., and S. L. Lukacs. 2008. Food allergy among U.S. children: Trends in preva­
lence and hospitalizations. NCHS Data Brief (10):1-8.
Branum, A. M., and S. L. Lukacs. 2009. Food allergy among children in the United States.
Pediatrics 124(6):1549-1555.
Bunyavanich, S., S. L. Rifas-Shiman, T. A. Platts-Mills, L. Workman, J. E. Sordillo, M.
W. Gillman, D. R. Gold, and A. A. Litonjua. 2014. Peanut allergy prevalence among
school-age children in a US cohort not selected for any disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol
134(3):753-755.
Burney, P. G., J. Potts, I. Kummeling, E. N. Mills, M. Clausen, R. Dubakiene, L. Barreales,
C. Fernandez-Perez, M. Fernandez-Rivas, T. M. Le, A. C. Knulst, M. L. Kowalski, J.
Lidholm, B. K. Ballmer-Weber, C. Braun-Fahlander, T. Mustakov, T. Kralimarkova, T.
Popov, A. Sakellariou, N. G. Papadopoulos, S. A. Versteeg, L. Zuidmeer, J. H. Akkerdaas,
K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, and R. van Ree. 2014. The prevalence and distribution of
food sensitization in European adults. Allergy 69(3):365-371.
Camargo, C. A., Jr., S. Clark, M. S. Kaplan, P. Lieberman, and R. A. Wood. 2007. Regional
differences in EpiPen prescriptions in the United States: The potential role of vitamin D.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(1):131-136.
Chafen, J. J., S. J. Newberry, M. A. Riedl, D. M. Bravata, M. Maglione, M. J. Suttorp, V.
Sundaram, N. M. Paige, A. Towfigh, B. J. Hulley, and P. G. Shekelle. 2010. Diagnosing
and managing common food allergies: A systematic review. JAMA 303(18):1848-1856.
Chen, J., Y. Hu, K. J. Allen, M. H. Ho, and H. Li. 2011. The prevalence of food allergy in
infants in Chongqing, China. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 22(4):356-360.
Connett, G. J., I. Gerez, E. A. Cabrera-Morales, A. Yuenyongviwat, J. Ngamphaiboon, P.
Chatchatee, P. Sangsupawanich, S. E. Soh, G. C. Yap, L. P. Shek, and B. W. Lee. 2012.
A population-based study of fish allergy in the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol 159(4):384-390.
Datema, M. R., L. Zuidmeer-Jongejan, R. Asero, L. Barreales, S. Belohlavkova, F. de Blay,
P. Bures, M. Clausen, R. Dubakiene, D. Gislason, M. Jedrzejczak-Czechowicz, M. L.
Kowalski, A. C. Knulst, T. Kralimarkova, T. M. Le, A. Lovegrove, J. Marsh, N. G.
Papadopoulos, T. Popov, N. Del Prado, A. Purohit, G. Reese, I. Reig, S. L. Seneviratne,
A. Sinaniotis, S. A. Versteeg, S. Vieths, A. H. Zwinderman, C. Mills, J. Lidholm, K.
Hoffmann-Sommergruber, M. Fernandez-Rivas, B. Ballmer-Weber, and R. van Ree. 2015.
Hazelnut allergy across Europe dissected molecularly: A EuroPrevall outpatient clinic
survey. J Allergy Clin Immunol 136(2):382-391.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). 2013. Literature searches and reviews related to
the prevalence of food allergy in Europe. EFSA Supporting Publications 10(11):1-343.
Eller, E., H. F. Kjaer, A. Host, K. E. Andersen, and C. Bindslev-Jensen. 2009. Food allergy
and food sensitization in early childhood: Results from the DARC cohort. Allergy
64(7):1023-1029.
Flinterman, A. E., E. F. Knol, D. A. Lencer, L. Bardina, C. F. den Hartog Jager, J. Lin, S. G.
Pasmans, C. A. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, H. A. Sampson, E. van Hoffen, and W. G. Shreffler.
2008. Peanut epitopes for IgE and IgG4 in peanut-sensitized children in relation to sever­
ity of peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 121(3):737-743 e710.

PREVALENCE

93

Gaspar-Marques, J., P. Carreiro-Martins, A. L. Papoila, I. Caires, C. Pedro, J. Araujo-Martins,
D. Virella, J. Rosado-Pinto, P. Leiria-Pinto, and N. Neuparth. 2014. Food allergy and
anaphylaxis in infants and preschool-age children. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 53(7):652-657.
Grabenhenrich, L. B., S. Dolle, A. Moneret-Vautrin, A. Kohli, L. Lange, T. Spindler, F. Rueff,
K. Nemat, I. Maris, E. Roumpedaki, K. Scherer, H. Ott, T. Reese, T. Mustakov, R. Lang,
M. Fernandez-Rivas, M. L. Kowalski, M. B. Bilo, J. O. Hourihane, N. G. Papadopoulos,
K. Beyer, A. Muraro, and M. Worm. 2016. Anaphylaxis in children and adolescents: The
European Anaphylaxis Registry. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(4):1128-1137.
Greenhawt, M., C. Weiss, M. L. Conte, M. Doucet, A. Engler, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2013.
Racial and ethnic disparity in food allergy in the United States: A systematic review. J
Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(4):378-386.
Grimshaw, K. E., T. Bryant, E. M. Oliver, J. Martin, J. Maskell, T. Kemp, E. N. Clare Mills,
K. D. Foote, B. M. Margetts, K. Beyer, and G. Roberts. 2015. Incidence and risk factors
for food hypersensitivity in UK infants: Results from a birth cohort study. Clin Transl
Allergy 6:1.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, M. R. Warrier, B. Smith, R. Kumar, J. Pongracic, and J. L. Holl.
2011. The prevalence, severity, and distribution of childhood food allergy in the United
States. Pediatrics 128(1):e9-e17.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, B. Smith, M. R. Warrier, J. Pongracic, and J. L. Holl. 2012.
Geographic variability of childhood food allergy in the United States. Clin Pediatr (Phila)
51(9):856-861.
Gupta, R., D. Holdford, L. Bilaver, A. Dyer, J. L. Holl, and D. Meltzer. 2013a. The economic
impact of childhood food allergy in the United States. JAMA Pediatr 167(11):1026-1031.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, B. Smith, J. Pongracic, J. L. Holl, and M. R. Warrier. 2013b.
Parent report of physician diagnosis in pediatric food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
131(1):150-156.
Hu, Y., J. Chen, and H. Li. 2010. Comparison of food allergy prevalence among Chinese
infants in Chongqing, 2009 versus 1999. Pediat Int 52(5):820-824.
Jackson, K. D., L. D. Howie, and L. J. Akinbami. 2013. Trends in allergic conditions among
children: United States, 1997-2011. NCHS Data Brief (121):1-8.
Jerschow, E., R. Y. Lin, M. M. Scaperotti, and A. P. McGinn. 2014. Fatal anaphylaxis in the
United States, 1999-2010: Temporal patterns and demographic associations. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 134(6):1318-1328.
Katelaris, C. H. 2010. Food allergy and oral allergy or pollen-food syndrome. Curr Opin Al­
lergy Clin Immunol 10(3):246-251.
Katz, Y., P. Gutierrez-Castrellon, M. G. Gonzalez, R. Rivas, B. W. Lee, and P. Alarcon. 2014.
A comprehensive review of sensitization and allergy to soy-based products. Clin Rev
Allergy Immunol 46(3):272-281.
Kaya, A., M. Erkocoglu, E. Civelek, B. Cakir, and C. N. Kocabas. 2013. Prevalence of con­
firmed IgE-mediated food allergy among adolescents in Turkey. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
24(5):456-462.
Kazemi-Shirazi, L., G. Pauli, A. Purohit, S. Spitzauer, R. Froschl, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber,
H. Breiteneder, O. Scheiner, D. Kraft, and R. Valenta. 2000. Quantitative IgE inhibition
experiments with purified recombinant allergens indicate pollen-derived allergens as the
sensitizing agents responsible for many forms of plant food allergy. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 105(1 Pt 1):116-125.
Keet, C. A., J. H. Savage, S. Seopaul, R. D. Peng, R. A. Wood, and E. C. Matsui. 2014.
Temporal trends and racial/ethnic disparity in self-reported pediatric food allergy in the
United States. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 112(3):222-229.

94

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Koplin, J. J., M. L. Tang, P. E. Martin, N. J. Osborne, A. J. Lowe, A. L. Ponsonby, M. N.
Robinson, D. Tey, L. Thiele, D. J. Hill, L. C. Gurrin, M. Wake, S. C. Dharmage, and
K. J. Allen. 2012. Predetermined challenge eligibility and cessation criteria for oral food
challenges in the HealthNuts population-based study of infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol
129(4):1145-1147.
Koplin, J. J., M. Wake, S. C. Dharmage, M. Matheson, M. L. Tang, L. C. Gurrin, T. Dwyer,
R. L. Peters, S. Prescott, A. L. Ponsonby, A. J. Lowe, and K. J. Allen. 2015. Cohort pro­
file: The HealthNuts Study: Population prevalence and environmental/genetic predictors
of food allergy. Int J Epidemiol 44(4):1161-1171.
Kristinsdottir, H., M. Clausen, H. S. Ragnarsdottir, I. H. Halldorsdottir, D. McBride, K. Beyer,
and S. T. Sigurdardottir. 2011. Prevalence of food allergy in Icelandic infants during first
year of life. Laeknabladid 97(1):11-18.
Kummeling, I., E. N. Mills, M. Clausen, R. Dubakiene, C. F. Perez, M. Fernandez-Rivas, A. C.
Knulst, M. L. Kowalski, J. Lidholm, T. M. Le, C. Metzler, T. Mustakov, T. Popov, J. Potts,
R. van Ree, A. Sakellariou, B. Tondury, K. Tzannis, and P. Burney. 2009. The EuroPrevall
surveys on the prevalence of food allergies in children and adults: Background and study
methodology. Allergy 64(10):1493-1497.
Kung, S. J., A. P. Steenhoff, and C. Gray. 2014. Food allergy in Africa: Myth or reality? Clin
Rev Allergy Immunol 46(3):241-249.
Kvenshagen, B., R. Halvorsen, and M. Jacobsen. 2009. Is there an increased frequency of food
allergy in children delivered by caesarean section compared to those delivered vaginally?
Acta Paediatr 98(2):324-327.
Lao-araya, M., and M. Trakultivakorn. 2012. Prevalence of food allergy among preschool
children in northern Thailand. Pediatr Int 54(2):238-243.
Le, T. M., E. van Hoffen, I. Kummeling, J. Potts, B. K. Ballmer-Weber, C. A. BruijnzeelKoomen, A. F. Lebens, J. Lidholm, T. M. Lindner, A. Mackie, E. C. Mills, R. van Ree, S.
Vieths, M. Fernandez-Rivas, P. G. Burney, and A. C. Knulst. 2015. Food allergy in the
Netherlands: Differences in clinical severity, causative foods, sensitization and DBPCFC
between community and outpatients. Clin Transl Allergy 5:8.
Lee, A. J., M. Thalayasingam, and B. W. Lee. 2013. Food allergy in Asia: How does it com­
pare? Asia Pac Allergy 3(1):3-14.
Lewis, S. A., K. E. Grimshaw, J. O. Warner, and J. O. Hourihane. 2005. The promiscuity of
immunoglobulin E binding to peanut allergens, as determined by Western blotting, cor­
relates with the severity of clinical symptoms. Clin Exp Allergy 35(6):767-773.
McBride, D., T. Keil, L. Grabenhenrich, R. Dubakiene, G. Drasutiene, A. Fiocchi, L. Dahdah,
A. B. Sprikkelman, A. A. Schoemaker, G. Roberts, K. Grimshaw, M. L. Kowalski, A.
Stanczyk-Przyluska, S. Sigurdardottir, M. Clausen, N. G. Papadopoulos, D. Mitsias,
L. Rosenfeld, M. Reche, C. Pascual, A. Reich, J. Hourihane, U. Wahn, E. N. Mills, A.
Mackie, and K. Beyer. 2012. The EuroPrevall birth cohort study on food allergy: Baseline
characteristics of 12,000 newborns and their families from nine European countries.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 23(3):230-239.
McGowan, E. C., R. D. Peng, P. M. Salo, D. C. Zeldin, and C. A. Keet. 2016. Changes in
food-specific IgE over time in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES). J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 4(4):713-720.
McWilliam, V., J. Koplin, C. Lodge, M. Tang, S. Dharmage, and K. Allen. 2015. The preva­
lence of tree nut allergy: A systematic review. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 15(9):54.
Moher, D., A. Liberati, J. Tetzlaff, D. G. Altman, and P. Group. 2009. Preferred reporting
items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. Ann Intern Med
151(4):264-269, W264.

PREVALENCE

95

Moneret-Vautrin, D., M. Morisset, L. Parisot, G. Kanny. 2005. French Allergovigilance Net­
work report about severe anaphylactic reactions to foods from 2001 to 2004. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 115(2):S247.
Nwaru, B. I., L. Hickstein, S. S. Panesar, G. Roberts, A. Muraro, and A. Sheikh. 2014.
Prevalence of common food allergies in Europe: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Allergy 69(8):992-1007.
Osborne, N. J., J. J. Koplin, P. E. Martin, L. C. Gurrin, L. Thiele, M. L. Tang, A. L.
Ponsonby, S. C. Dharmage, and K. J. Allen. 2010. The HealthNuts population-based
study of paediatric food allergy: Validity, safety and acceptability. Clin Exper Allergy
40(10):1516-1522.
Osborne, N. J., J. J. Koplin, P. E. Martin, L. C. Gurrin, A. J. Lowe, M. C. Matheson, A. L.
Ponsonby, M. Wake, M. L. Tang, S. C. Dharmage, and K. J. Allen. 2011. Prevalence of
challenge-proven IgE-mediated food allergy using population-based sampling and pre­
determined challenge criteria in infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol 127(3):668-676.e1-2.
Osterballe, M., T. K. Hansen, C. G. Mortz, A. Host, and C. Bindslev-Jensen. 2005. The preva­
lence of food hypersensitivity in an unselected population of children and adults. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol 16(7):567-573.
Panesar, S. S., S. Javad, D. de Silva, B. I. Nwaru, L. Hickstein, A. Muraro, G. Roberts,
M. Worm, M. B. Bilo, V. Cardona, A. E. Dubois, A. Dunn Galvin, P. Eigenmann, M.
Fernandez-Rivas, S. Halken, G. Lack, B. Niggemann, A. F. Santos, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra,
Z. Q. Zolkipli, and A. Sheikh. 2013. The epidemiology of anaphylaxis in Europe: A
systematic review. Allergy 68(11):1353-1361.
Rona, R. J., T. Keil, C. Summers, D. Gislason, L. Zuidmeer, E. Sodergren, S. T. Sigurdardottir,
T. Lindner, K. Goldhahn, J. Dahlstrom, D. McBride, and C. Madsen. 2007. The preva­
lence of food allergy: A meta-analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(3):638-646.
Ross, M. P., M. Ferguson, D. Street, K. Klontz, T. Schroeder, and S. Luccioli. 2008. Analysis
of food-allergic and anaphylactic events in the National Electronic Injury Surveillance
System. J Allergy Clin Immunol 121(1):166-171.
Rudders, S. A., J. A. Espinola, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2010. North-south differences in US
emergency department visits for acute allergic reactions. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
104(5):413-416.
Salo, P. M., S. J. Arbes, Jr., R. Jaramillo, A. Calatroni, C. H. Weir, M. L. Sever, J. A. Hoppin,
K. M. Rose, A. H. Liu, P. J. Gergen, H. E. Mitchell, and D. C. Zeldin. 2014. Prevalence of
allergic sensitization in the United States: Results from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) 2005-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 134(2):350-359.
Sampson, H. A., L. Mendelson, and J. P. Rosen. 1992. Fatal and near-fatal anaphylactic reac­
tions to food in children and adolescents. N Engl J Med 327(6):380-384.
Schoemaker, A. A., A. B. Sprikkelman, K. E. Grimshaw, G. Roberts, L. Grabenhenrich, L.
Rosenfeld, S. Siegert, R. Dubakiene, O. Rudzeviciene, M. Reche, A. Fiandor, N. G. Pa­
padopoulos, A. Malamitsi-Puchner, A. Fiocchi, L. Dahdah, S. T. Sigurdardottir, M. Clau­
sen, A. Stanczyk-Przyluska, K. Zeman, E. N. Mills, D. McBride, T. Keil, and K. Beyer.
2015. Incidence and natural history of challenge-proven cow milk allergy in European
children—EuroPrevall birth cohort. Allergy 70(8):963-972.
Shamseer, L., D. Moher, M. Clarke, D. Ghersi, A. Liberati, M. Petticrew, P. Shekelle, and
L. A. Stewart. 2015. Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis
protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015: Elaboration and explanation. BMJ 349:g7647.
Shreffler, W. G., K. Beyer, T. H. Chu, A. W. Burks, and H. A. Sampson. 2004. Microarray
immunoassay: Association of clinical history, in vitro IgE function, and heterogeneity of
allergenic peanut epitopes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 113(4):776-782.
Sicherer, S. H. 2011. Epidemiology of food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 127(3):594-602.

96

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Sicherer, S. H., A. Munoz-Furlong, J. H. Godbold, and H. A. Sampson. 2010. US prevalence
of self-reported peanut, tree nut, and sesame allergy: 11-year follow-up. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 125(6):1322-1326.
Soller, L., M. Ben-Shoshan, D. W. Harrington, M. Knoll, J. Fragapane, L. Joseph, Y. St Pierre,
S. La Vieille, K. Wilson, S. J. Elliott, and A. E. Clarke. 2015. Adjusting for nonresponse
bias corrects overestimates of food allergy prevalence. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
3(2):291-293.
Umasunthar, T., J. Leonardi-Bee, M. Hodes, P. J. Turner, C. Gore, P. Habibi, J. O. Warner,
and R. J. Boyle. 2013. Incidence of fatal food anaphylaxis in people with food allergy: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Allergy 43(12):1333-1341.
Umasunthar, T., J. Leonardi-Bee, P. J. Turner, M. Hodes, C. Gore, J. O. Warner, and R. J.
Boyle. 2015. Incidence of food anaphylaxis in people with food allergy: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Allergy 45(11):1621-1636.
Vadas, P., M. Gold, B. Perelman, G. M. Liss, G. Lack, T. Blyth, F. E. Simons, K. J. Simons,
D. Cass, and J. Yeung. 2008. Platelet-activating factor, PAF acetylhydrolase, and severe
anaphylaxis. N Engl J Med 358(1):28-35.
Venter, C., B. Pereira, J. Grundy, C. B. Clayton, G. Roberts, B. Higgins, and T. Dean. 2006.
Incidence of parentally reported and clinically diagnosed food hypersensitivity in the first
year of life. J Allergy Clin Immunol 117(5):1118-1124.
Venter, C., B. Pereira, K. Voigt, J. Grundy, C. B. Clayton, B. Higgins, S. H. Arshad, and T.
Dean. 2008. Prevalence and cumulative incidence of food hypersensitivity in the first 3
years of life. Allergy 63(3):354-359.
Venter, C., S. Hasan Arshad, J. Grundy, B. Pereira, C. Bernie Clayton, K. Voigt, B. Higgins, and
T. Dean. 2010. Time trends in the prevalence of peanut allergy: Three cohorts of children
from the same geographical location in the UK. Allergy 65(1):103-108.
Wang, J. 2013. Oral allergy syndrome. In Food Allergy: Adverse Reactions to Foods and Food
Additives, 5th ed., edited by D. Metcalfe, H. A. Sampson, R. A. Simon and G. Lack.
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Winberg, A., C. E. West, A. Strinnholm, L. Nordstrom, L. Hedman, and E. Ronmark. 2015.
Assessment of allergy to milk, egg, cod, and wheat in Swedish schoolchildren: A popula­
tion based cohort study. PLoS One 10(7):e0131804.
Wood, R. A., C. A. Camargo, Jr., P. Lieberman, H. A. Sampson, L. B. Schwartz, M. Zitt, C.
Collins, M. Tringale, M. Wilkinson, J. Boyle, and F. E. Simons. 2014. Anaphylaxis in
America: The prevalence and characteristics of anaphylaxis in the United States. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 133(2):461-467.
Xepapadaki, P., A. Fiocchi, L. Grabenhenrich, G. Roberts, K. E. Grimshaw, A. Fiandor, J. I.
Larco, S. Sigurdardottir, M. Clausen, N. G. Papadopoulos, L. Dahdah, A. Mackie, A. B.
Sprikkelman, A. A. Schoemaker, R. Dubakiene, I. Butiene, M. L. Kowalski, K. Zeman,
S. Gavrili, T. Keil, and K. Beyer. 2016. Incidence and natural history of hen’s egg allergy
in the first 2 years of life—The EuroPrevall birth cohort study. Allergy 71(3):350-357.
Zuidmeer, L., K. Goldhahn, R. J. Rona, D. Gislason, C. Madsen, C. Summers, E. Sodergren,
J. Dahlstrom, T. Lindner, S. T. Sigurdardottir, D. McBride, and T. Keil. 2008. The preva­
lence of plant food allergies: A systematic review. J Allergy Clin Immunol 121(5):1210­
1218 e1214.

4
Assessments, Diagnostic Testing,
Disease Monitoring, and Prognosis

OVERVIEW
A diagnosis of food allergy carries numerous health, emotional, social,
and nutritional consequences. Therefore, a proper diagnosis is imperative.
Unfortunately, studies suggest that many individuals needlessly avoid foods
on the presumption of a food allergy without seeking medical confirmation,
a practice that can lead to unnecessary risk and burden (Boyce et al., 2010;
Fleischer et al., 2011; Rona et al., 2007). For example, in one meta-analysis,
the rate of self-reported food allergy was 12 percent and 13 percent for
children and adults compared to 3 percent when confirmation with testing
was applied (Boyce et al., 2010; Rona et al., 2007). One of the major issues
in food allergy is the common misconception that having a “positive test,”
by a blood test or allergy skin prick test (SPT, otherwise known as sensitiza­
tion, or a condition in which an individual produces detectable food-specific
immunoglobulin E [IgE] antibody), is equivalent to having a clinical food
allergy. For example, Fleischer et al. performed 111 supervised feeding tests
with 44 children avoiding foods because of positive skin or serum allergy
tests and, overall, 93 percent of the children were tolerant of the avoided
food (Fleischer et al., 2011). Although this was a subpopulation of children
with high rate of atopic dermatitis, on a population level, many more per­
sons are also sensitized to foods than are clinically reactive upon ingestion.
For example, 2005-2006 National Health and Nutrition Examination Sur­
vey (NHANES) data showed a 7.6 percent rate of positive serum IgE tests
to peanut (10.7 percent in children ages 6 to 19 years), clearly higher than
the prevalence of clinical peanut allergy (Liu et al., 2010). Compounding
97

98

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

the problem, many physicians lack an understanding of how to apply com­
mon diagnostic tests and interpret the results. In a survey of 407 primary
care physicians, less than 30 percent of the participants reported that they
were comfortable interpreting laboratory tests to diagnose food allergy, and
38 percent indicated incorrectly that skin or blood tests were sufficient for
a diagnosis (Gupta et al., 2010). Clearly, the lack of understanding among
physicians is compounded among the lay public.
Although overdiagnosis is a concern, conversely, assuming that an aller­
gen has been identified as a trigger of a serious allergic response, a lack of
confirmation could lead to re-exposure to the true culprit, with serious con­
sequences. It is therefore imperative that individuals with suspected food
allergy seek a medical diagnosis to identify whether the cause of symptoms
is a food allergy and to identify culprit foods.
Considering the various symptoms (e.g., rashes, respiratory symptoms,
gastrointestinal [GI] symptoms) and medical illnesses (e.g., atopic dermati­
tis, anaphylaxis) attributable to food allergy, many of which have alternate
diagnoses (i.e., intolerance, pharmacologic reactions), or nonfood trig­
gers (i.e., pollen allergy, irritants), food allergy diagnosis is complicated.
Additionally, no simple tests exist that, in isolation, diagnose a specific
food allergy (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014). The primary tools
currently available for diagnosis include the medical history, elimination
diets, SPT, food-specific IgE (sIgE) (serum tests for food-specific IgE against
specific proteins in foods), component resolved diagnostics (CRD), and
medically supervised oral food challenges (OFCs).
This chapter includes relevant aspects of mechanisms of food allergy in
relation to the current accepted methods for diagnostic testing and progno­
sis, including misconceptions about the methods, limitations, and factors
that might affect diagnosis. The chapter also describes some promising
methods that need further research, validation, or standardization before
being used routinely, and methods that are not recommended for use rou­
tinely. The chapter ends with overall conclusions, recommendations, and
research needs.
APPROACH TO LITERATURE REVIEW
In preparing this chapter, new individual systematic reviews or metaanalyses were not conducted. The primary resources for discussion, find­
ings, conclusions, and recommendations were derived from the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases/National Institutes of Health
(NIAID/NIH)–supported Guidelines (Boyce et al., 2010), the European
Academy of Allergy & Clinical Immunology (EAACI) Guidelines (Muraro
et al., 2014), and associated systematic reviews (Soares-Weiser et al., 2014)
as well as the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

99

(AAAAI) Guidelines (Sampson et al., 2014; see Chapter 1, Table 1-1). Addi­
tional PubMed searches were selectively performed to identify studies and
reports in the literature, especially focusing on papers published after the
aforementioned reports. Meta-analyses, systematic reviews, expert reports,
and practice guidelines were selected when available and supplemented with
more recent publications.
REASONS TO INITIATE ASSESSMENTS FOR FOOD ALLERGY
The NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines (Boyce et al., 2010) suggest
that food allergy should be considered in a number of specific circum­
stances. Having allergic symptoms within minutes to hours after ingestion,
especially from a specific food on more than one occasion, is suggestive
of a food allergy and warrants investigation. Symptoms can include skin
symptoms of itchy rashes, hives, or swelling; eye symptoms of itching, tear­
ing, redness, or swelling; oral symptoms of itching or swelling of the lips,
tongue, or palate; upper airway symptoms of congestion, itching, sneezing,
nasal discharge, or hoarseness; lower airway symptoms of cough, chest
tightness, wheezing, or trouble breathing; gastrointestinal symptoms of
nausea, pain, vomiting, or diarrhea; cardiovascular symptoms of fast or
slow heart rate, dizziness, low blood pressure, confusion, loss of conscious­
ness; uterine contractions; and a sense of “impending doom.”
Food allergy diagnostic testing also may be warranted for infants,
young children, and selected older individuals with moderate to severe
atopic dermatitis because a higher rate of food allergy occurs in these
populations, whether or not the food allergy may be contributing to the
rash (Boyce et al., 2010; Sidbury et al., 2014). Disorders with subacute
or chronic symptoms that indicate food-related disorders, such as food
protein–induced enterocolitis (FPIES), enteropathy, and allergic colitis,
also warrant investigation for food-allergic triggers. Food allergy also
should be considered in children and adults with eosinophilic esophagitis (Boyce et al., 2010; Liacouras et al., 2011; Markowitz et al., 2003).
Importantly, food allergy is not a typical trigger of chronic asthma or
chronic rhinitis in childhood (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014),
although it can cause occupational asthma in certain groups, such as bak­
ers or shellfish handlers.
The initiation of food allergy diagnostic testing also has some areas of
uncertainty. For example, one expert panel (Boyce et al., 2010) concluded
that there was insufficient evidence to recommend routine food allergy test­
ing before introducing highly allergenic foods to children at high risk of
food allergy, such as those with pre-existing severe allergic disease or family
history of food allergy. However, they indicated value in such evaluations
for selected patients, such as those having a peanut allergy or evidence of

100

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

another underlying food allergy. For example, testing for tree nut allergy in
a child with peanut allergy who has not yet been exposed to tree nuts would
be appropriate. Similarly, consensus recommendations regarding introduc­
tion of peanut to high-risk infants with early-onset atopic disease, such
as severe eczema or egg allergy, have suggested that infants might benefit
from evaluation to diagnose any food allergy and to evaluate an infant for
introduction of peanut (Fleischer et al., 2015).
A common misconception or concern among caregivers is that if one
sibling develops a food allergy, other siblings also will become allergic.
However, a recent study of a large cohort of families with food allergies
found that only a small proportion of siblings are both sensitized (based on
SPT and IgE) and clinically reactive to a food (based on history of typical
symptoms of an allergic reaction to a food) (Gupta el al., 2016). In support
of NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines (Boyce et al., 2010), the authors con­
cluded that testing for food allergy in siblings without a history of clinical
reactivity appears to be unjustified and that screening may lead to negative
consequences related to potential misdiagnosis and unnecessary avoidance
of a food.
MECHANISMS OF FOOD ALLERGY IN
RELATIONSHIP TO DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Chapter 2 described specific food allergic disorders and pathophysiol­
ogy. With regard to diagnostic testing, the pathophysiology of the disor­
der is relevant. For example, tests for food-specific IgE antibodies (i.e.,
SPT, sIgE, and CRD) are relevant for IgE-mediated disorders. These tests
may sometimes be performed in disorders that are non-IgE-mediated to
identify a potential for acute allergic reactions if the previously consumed
food has been removed from the diet after having been a part of the diet
(Liacouras et al., 2011), or to determine whether there has been a change
in pathophysiology to an IgE-mediated disorder, as can occur with FPIES
(Caubet et al., 2014). In contrast, the medical history, elimination diets,
and physician-supervised OFCs are useful in all food allergic disorder
evaluations.
CURRENTLY AVAILABLE MODALITIES ROUTINELY
USED TO DIAGNOSE FOOD ALLERGY
A number of modalities have been recommended for diagnosing food
allergy (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2014).
These are reviewed briefly in the following section with an emphasis on
utility and limitations. The diagnostic tests discussed below are generally
not used in isolation (see “General Diagnostic Algorithms”).

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

101

Medical History and Physical Examination
A thorough medical history and physical examination are imperative in
the diagnosis of food allergy (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014). They
can help to identify the likelihood of the diagnosis, and suggest whether the
pathophysiology is IgE or non-IgE, which is important for test selection.
The history and physical examination also identify potential triggers, which
help to hone specific test selection. Importantly, details of the history may
disclose alternative reasons for symptoms, other than a food allergy. For
example, an acute allergic reaction attributed to a food may actually be
triggered by other allergens, such as medications or insect stings. Numer­
ous triggers, such as environmental irritants, change in temperature, and
infections, can initiate atopic dermatitis flares. Chronic GI symptoms can
be attributed to food but may actually be caused by medical conditions
such as reflux or inflammatory bowel disease. In fact, a broad differential
diagnosis exists to distinguish food allergy from other allergic disorders or
from disorders that are not immunologically mediated and associated with
food. Food poisoning or pharmacologic effects from food components may
be masqueraders of a food allergy. Many patients confuse food allergy and
food intolerance (Sicherer et al., 2012). Food intolerance is not mediated by
the immune system, and is characterized by symptoms such as gas, bloating,
and diarrhea in the case of lactose intolerance.
No evidence-based, standard series of questions has been developed for
use in taking a medical history to evaluate a possible food allergy, although
creating this type of question set is under study (Skypala et al., 2015). The
clinical history should include possible eliciting allergens, the timing and
chronicity of the ingestion and symptoms, symptom severity, reproducibil­
ity, risk factors, identification of foods that are tolerated, and coexisting
medical and allergic problems. The use of structured questionnaires on
symptoms, foods, and other background information may be beneficial.
However, based on limited data, the predictive value of the clinical history
for immediate symptoms, either alone or in combination with SPT or sIgE,
ranges from 50 percent to 100 percent (Muraro et al., 2014). Nonetheless,
the clinical history is central to provide reasoning (prior probability) appli­
cable to additional test selection and interpretation on a patient-specific
basis, as will be reviewed further below.
Elimination Diets
Elimination diets, with removal of one or a few specific foods, is
considered useful in diagnosing food allergy, especially for disorders with
chronic symptoms, such as eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE), atopic dermati­
tis, and allergic proctocolitis (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014). A

102

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

diagnostic elimination diet is different from a treatment elimination diet,
where an identified food allergen is removed from the diet as a form of
therapy. When a properly performed diagnostic elimination diet does not
ameliorate the symptoms, food allergy to the eliminated food(s) is unlikely.
If elimination does result in amelioration of symptoms, re-administration
of the food, for example during an OFC, may be needed to prove a cause­
and-effect relationship. However, experts have recognized that for some
disorders, such as FPIES, a successful elimination diet in combination with
a convincing history may be sufficient for diagnosis (Boyce et al., 2010;
Sampson et al., 2014). The rationale for this decision is based on the con­
cern that the OFC may provoke significant morbidity and may be better
reserved for evaluating later resolution of the disorder.
Determining which foods should be eliminated is based on medical
history, allergy testing, and/or the epidemiology of the illness considering
common triggers. The results of the elimination diet are monitored and
evaluated over a pre-specified period, such as 2 to 4 weeks. There are many
caveats regarding the interpretation of a diagnostic elimination diet because
chronic symptoms may vary for reasons other than ones related to foods
(e.g., eczema flaring due to infection). Studies evaluating their diagnostic
value are lacking, and malnutrition resulting from prolonged elimination
diets that exclude multiple foods is a concern (Boyce et al., 2010).
Skin Prick Tests
Guidelines recommend using SPTs for assistance in diagnosing IgE­
mediated food allergies, but the test results alone are not considered suf­
ficient for diagnosis (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson et
al., 2014). The test can be done in any age group, although reactivity may
be lower in infants and the elderly. The test involves puncturing the surface
of the skin to introduce an allergen and evaluating the area for a wheal
(small swelling) and flare (redness) response that can be measured. The test
is applied to the forearm or back and the results of the allergen tests are
compared with a negative saline and a positive histamine control test. The
choice of tests is guided by the clinical history. Results are read at 15 or
20 minutes. A positive test correlates with the presence of specific IgE anti­
bodies bound to the surface of cutaneous mast cells. The test is considered
safe, because systemic allergic reactions are rare. In contrast, intradermal
testing1 with food is not recommended because it is overly sensitive and
could induce systemic reactions (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014).
1 Intradermal test consist of delivering the food into the dermis, the skin layer underneath
the epidermis (which is the upper skin layer where an SPT is performed). The dermis is, on
most places of the human body, only a few mm thick.

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

103

Various caveats have been identified regarding SPTs. Trained health
care personnel are needed because of a risk of serious allergic reactions.
Variables that can affect outcomes include the device used to introduce
the allergen (a number of devices are on the market), operator error, the
extract (not standardized), the manner of recording and reporting test
results, and the timing of day, age, and sex of the patient, the patient’s use
of any antihistamines, and anatomical site of testing (forearm versus back).
Extracts may lack relevant allergens and testing using fresh extracts of food
has been suggested for some circumstances, such as testing fruits and veg­
etables for pollen-food allergy syndrome. False negative tests (i.e., a skin
test that is negative despite the fact that the patient experiences a reaction
from ingesting the tested food) are possible, requiring caution if suspicion
of allergy is high. The SPT reagents and methods have not been standard­
ized. A systematic review and meta-analysis identified varying sensitivity
and specificity according to the food evaluated, at a cut-off value of 3 mm
wheal diameter in studies using OFCs as the diagnostic standard (SoaresWeiser et al., 2014) (see Table 4-1). Sensitivity is generally high, whereas
specificity is lower.
These tests have a low positive predictive value for making a diagnosis
of food allergy but high negative predictive value. Although a positive test
is generally considered a wheal diameter equal to or greater than 3 mm,
studies suggest that larger mean wheal diameters correlate with a higher
likelihood of clinical reactivity (Pucar et al., 2001; Saarinen et al., 2001;
Sporik et al., 2000; Verstege et al., 2005). A systematic review (Peters et
al., 2012) evaluated studies reporting SPT wheal sizes that correspond to
high predictive values for allergy (i.e., skin tests sizes above which allergy
is almost certain). However, this review (Peters et al., 2012) noted that pre­
dictive values vary between studies, likely for numerous reasons including
patient selection, food challenge protocols, reagents used for testing, and
manner of reporting.
Food-Specific Serum IgE
Guidelines recommend using sIgE tests to identify foods that may
provoke IgE-mediated reactions, but the test result alone is not considered
sufficient for diagnosis (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson
et al., 2014). The choice of tests is guided by the clinical history. Modern
tests use fluorescence enzyme-labeled assays and have replaced radioal­
lergosorbent tests (RAST). The term “RAST” is therefore antiquated. In
the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved
three automated systems to measure sIgE. Each system has slightly dif­
ferent methods for test development, and results from one system are not
directly comparable to others (Hamilton and Williams, 2010; Hamilton et

104

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 4-1 Sensitivity and Specificity of SPT for Selected Foods
Sensitivity

Specificity

Cow milk

88% (95% CI: 76%-94%)

68% (95% CI: 56%-77%)

Egg

92% (95% CI: 80%-97%)

58% (95% CI: 49%-67%)

Wheat

73% (95% CI: 56%-85%)

73% (95% CI: 48%-89%)

Soy

55% (95% CI: 33%-75%)

68% (95% CI: 52%-80%)

Peanut

95% (95% CI: 88%-98%)

61% (95% CI: 47%-74%)

NOTE: CI = confidence interval; SPT = skin prick test.
SOURCE: Soares-Weiser et al., 2014.

al., 2011; Wang et al., 2008). sIgE is not affected by antihistamine use, as
SPTs are.
The sensitivity and specificity of SPT and sIgE were evaluated in a 2010
meta-analysis with a conclusion that neither test was statistically superior
(Chafen et al., 2010). However, SPTs and sIgE tests do not always correlate,
and so doing both tests can be advantageous, as can doing one followed
by the other, if clinically warranted. A 2014 systematic review and metaanalysis (Soares-Weiser et al., 2014) considered mixed cut-off levels for
sIgE but chose a >0.35 kUA/L2 value when possible. The sensitivities and
specificities for various allergenic food are in Table 4-2.
Laboratory reports of undetectable sIgE concentrations occasionally
occur in patients who go on to react to the food tested probably for rea­
sons similar to the ones described above for SPT, so caution and additional
evaluation is necessary in this circumstance if a history is highly sugges­
tive of food allergy. In addition, different laboratories or test systems may
report test results at different detection limits, for example <0.10 or <0.35
kUA/L.
Studies have correlated increasing sIgE levels with increasing risk of
clinical allergy. Some studies have calculated cut-off levels suggesting 95
percent predictive values for clinical reactivity (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro
et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2014). Although 95 percent predictive cutoff
values have been calculated in specific studies, these values vary between
studies, likely due to differences in patient selection, age, clinical disorders
evaluated, and many other factors. The predictive values of certain cut-offs
are dependent on the frequency of the food allergy and may therefore differ
widely in different populations.

2 Kilounit allergen per liter.

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

105

TABLE 4-2 Sensitivity and Specificity of Food-Specific Serum IgE (sIgE)
Test for Selected Foods
Sensitivity

Specificity

Cow milk

87% (95% CI: 75%-94%)

48% (95% CI: 36%-59%)

Egg

93% (95% CI: 82%-98%)

49% (95% CI: 40%-58%)

Wheat

83% (95% CI: 69%-92%)

43% (95% CI: 20%-69%)

Soy

83% (95% CI: 64%-93%)

38% (95% CI: 24%-54%)

Peanut

96% (95% CI: 92%-98%)

59% (95% CI: 45%-72%)

NOTE: CI = confidence interval.
SOURCE: Soares-Weiser et al., 2014.

Component Resolved Diagnostics
CRD, sometimes referred to as molecular testing, involves measuring
sIgE against individual allergenic food proteins. This testing is available
in single allergen formats and microarray. The comparative utility of the
two approaches has not been extensively studied. Commercially available
microarray provides semi-quantitative results that correlate with single
allergen formats and may be more susceptible to antibody competition due
to lack of allergen excess (Canonica et al., 2013). The aim of the test is to
increase specificity, based on the understanding that some food proteins
may be more potent for causing symptoms than others within the same
food. For example, relevant proteins may resist digestion, and IgE immune
responses against such proteins may have a greater diagnostic value for
systemic allergy than immune responses against more labile proteins that
degrade easily and are not systemically absorbed. The AAAAI Guidelines
indicate that CRD can be considered for diagnosis, but is not routinely
recommended because clinical utility is not fully elucidated (Sampson et al.,
2014). Nonetheless, its utility in certain clinical scenarios is recognized. The
EAACI Guidelines (Muraro et al., 2014) indicate that the test is promis­
ing and broadly studied, but that evidence from additional well-designed
randomized controlled trials on the diagnostic test accuracy are required
to assess its diagnostic value. A World Allergy Organization expert panel
report suggests these tests as a third line approach following clinical his­
tory and extract-based testing, but that they may be included in second line
testing for experienced users (Canonica et al., 2013). When SPT and sIgE
are inconclusive, the EAACI Guidelines (Muraro et al., 2014) suggest that
CRD, if available, provides additional information. The Japanese Guideline
for Food Allergy (Urisu et al., 2014) describes advantages of using CRD for
peanut, soy, and wheat allergies.
An accumulating number of studies have evaluated CRD for a variety

106

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

of foods; the best studied is CRD for peanut allergy. A systematic review
(Klemans et al., 2015) found that sIgE testing to Ara h 2 had diagnostic
superiority to other peanut protein components and to SPT and peanutspecific IgE using whole peanut extracts. The studies were primarily pedi­
atric cohorts (21 of 22), and authors concluded that Ara h 2 testing should
replace the other tests in clinical practice, especially in children. Although
some disagreement may exist, various studies have determined that increas­
ing levels of IgE against Ara h 2 correlates with risk of clinical reactiv­
ity (undetectable Ara h 2 does not exclude peanut allergy). Sensitivity
and specificity of the test varies among studies, similar to the limitations
described for sIgE and SPT, and some studies suggest geographic differ­
ences in correlation to clinical reactivity to different proteins (Agabriel et
al., 2014; Ballmer-Weber et al., 2015; Beyer et al., 2015; Ebisawa et al.,
2012; Eller and Bindslev-Jensen, 2013; Keet et al., 2013; Klemans et al.,
2015; Kukkonen et al., 2015; Lieberman et al., 2013; Lopes de Oliveira et
al., 2013). If sensitization to peanut is solely caused by Ara h 8 (the birch
pollen–related protein in peanut) in regions with birch pollen exposure,
systemic clinical allergy is unlikely (Asarnoj et al., 2012).
Numerous other foods have been less comprehensively evaluated by
CRD. Sensitization to the hazelnut proteins Cor a 9 and Cor a 14 are
associated with higher risk of food allergy to hazelnut and provide better
diagnostic utility than the extract tests or other protein components (Beyer
et al., 2015; Faber et al., 2014; Kattan et al., 2014; Masthoff et al., 2013).
The soy proteins Gly m 4 and Gly m 5 (Berneder et al., 2013; Kattan and
Sampson, 2015) appear relevant in soy allergy diagnostics. Literature on
the utility of CRD testing on a number of foods is growing, including
wheat, cashew, milk, egg, shrimp, carrot, and celery (Muraro et al., 2014;
Savvatianos et al., 2015; Soares-Weiser et al., 2014). Sensitization to the
cashew nut (Ana o 3, a protein belonging to the 2S albumin family of pro­
teins) is highly predictive of cashew and pistachio allergy in Greek children
(Savvatianos et al., 2015). Fruits typically induce mild oral allergic symp­
toms related to oral allergy syndrome induced by labile pollen-homologous
fruit proteins. If IgE binds to stable fruit proteins, such as lipid transfer
proteins, it may be associated with more severe reactions, but literature to
characterize the role of component allergen testing in fruit and vegetable
allergy is limited, and current studies show variable results (Lopez-Matas
et al., 2015; Novembre et al., 2012; Tolkki et al., 2013; van Winkle and
Chang, 2014; Vieira et al., 2014).
In summary, CRD is an emerging testing methodology in widespread
use for select foods. They provide additional insights on diagnosis in spe­
cific circumstances. More studies are needed, however, to draw specific
conclusions about their diagnostic utility. Component testing for peanut
should be used when indicated (Dang et al., 2012; Klemans et al., 2015).

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

107

Like judicious use of the medical history, SPT and sIgE, CRD testing pro­
vides clinically useful results and can reduce the need for OFCs.
Oral Food Challenges
The OFC is a feeding test that typically involves a gradual, medicallysupervised ingestion of increasingly larger doses of the food being tested as
a possible food allergen. Guidelines recommend using OFCs to diagnose
food allergy (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2014).
Most OFCs are conducted with the food in its natural form; this is called
an open OFC. Oral food challenges also can be performed in a single-blind
protocol with the food masked from the patient’s perspective so less patient
bias occurs because of anxiety. Bias is a concern with OFC because antici­
pation of a reaction can result in subjective symptoms (e.g., abdominal
pain, nausea, or eczema flare) and possibly objective ones (e.g. hives). To
address this concern a double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenge
(DBPCOFC) can be conducted. This challenge, which is considered the
“gold standard” for diagnosis of food allergy, involves masking the tested
allergen and feeding it or indistinguishable placebo randomly without the
patient or observer knowing if the allergen or placebo is being tested. How­
ever, the double-blind challenge is time-consuming and expensive, and is
used more often for research, whereas open food challenges are routinely
used in clinical settings. An open or single-blind OFC is considered reli­
able if no symptoms occur. An open feeding of a meal-sized portion of the
food prepared in a usual fashion (e.g., scrambled egg, cooked fish) is also
typically performed to confirm tolerance following a negative DBPCOFC
with a smaller portion. If only subjective symptoms occur during a food
challenge, a false impression of allergy is possible. If objective symptoms
occur (e.g., urticaria, angioedema, or anaphylaxis) and the result correlates
with medical history and laboratory tests, then the diagnosis is supported.
Ambiguous results from an open or single-blind OFC can be evaluated by
a DBPCOFC. This challenge also may be considered when patients have
primary symptoms of chronic eczema or suspected anxiety.
The OFC is generally indicated to demonstrate allergy or tolerance
when the medical history and supporting tests are not sufficient to make
a conclusion. This may include circumstances such as a suspected allergy
with ambiguous test results, or with the expectation that a food allergy has
resolved. The OFC also may be used for individuals with ongoing allergy
to evaluate thresholds or response to therapy. As the generally accepted
gold standard, the test is highly specific. However, patients uncommonly
experience reactions on subsequent ingestion despite tolerance during the
test; the rate of this occurrence may vary by dosing regimen (Caffarelli and
Petroccione, 2001; Miceli Sopo et al., 2016; Niggemann et al., 2012).

108

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

The OFC is useful for evaluating food allergy whatever the underlying
pathophysiology or time course of symptoms, and can be used for all age
groups. The test carries a risk of allergic reactions and anaphylaxis, and so
caution, content monitoring, experienced personnel and equipment, and
medications for managing reactions are required. Feeding a small amount
of the suspected allergen and gradually increasing the amount mitigates
some risk. The test is stopped at the judgment of the supervising health
professional due to the onset of symptoms or at the request of the patient.
Immediate symptoms typically occur within 2 hours after ingestion, but
increases in atopic dermatitis symptoms may occur over hours or days.
Rigorous objective criteria for determining tolerance or reactivity, consistent
application of procedures, and good record keeping and documentation
are paramount. No universally accepted manner of dosing, scoring, and
monitoring the OFC procedure has been established, and potential dos­
ing regimens have not been compared prospectively. Various approaches
have been suggested, and issues such as indications and contraindications
have been summarized (Sampson et al., 2012, 2014). Standardized dos­
ing protocols have been published but not validated (Muraro et al., 2014;
Sampson et al., 2012, 2014). For infants, open OFCs with objective scoring
criteria are generally sufficient to make or refute a diagnosis of food allergy.
Application of the OFC to infants, and additional limitations of the test are
additionally reviewed in Chapter 5, Methodological Limitations.
The OFC is usually undertaken with the goal of the patient ingesting an
age-appropriate, meal-size portion of the food prepared in a manner that
will be ingested in the future. Processing and cooking methods can alter
its allergenic properties. For example baked egg or milk products are less
allergenic than raw forms. The matrix in which the tested allergen is mixed
also can affect outcomes, as absorption rates may vary. For example, fatty
foods are absorbed more slowly than other foods (Grimshaw et al., 2003).
Although foods could be freeze-dried and placed into opaque capsules to
mask the taste as well as early signs of reaction involving the oral mucosa,
this approach is not in favor due to alteration of proteins and lack of
control of release of the food from the capsules. The initial dose is gener­
ally selected to be less than a likely threshold for a reaction, or significant
reaction (e.g., less than 3 mg) if the patient is suspected of being highly
sensitive (Rolinck-Werninghaus et al., 2012). If a threshold-determining
OFC is being undertaken, a lower starting dose may be used. Doses are
given at 15- to 30-minute intervals although adjustments can be made. If
symptoms occur after several doses, it cannot be concluded that the “last
dose” independently triggered a reaction, as symptoms could be caused by
prior doses or a cumulative effect (Blumchen et al., 2014). Also, escalating
dose OFCs are similar to certain immunotherapy protocols and may there­
fore result in a reaction at a higher dose than would be the case if this were

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

109

the first and only dose. The time of testing can vary but is typically 3 to 8
hours depending on the doses, symptoms, and challenge format. The test
may be formatted differently for non-IgE-mediated food allergies, such as
FPIES, where the feeding may be dosed more rapidly and the expectation
of reaction is delayed, occurring approximately 2 hours later. The test is
generally undertaken when the food has been excluded from the diet. In
the case of suspected chronic symptoms, the time of exclusion is typically
2 to 8 weeks to obtain a baseline.
The risk of OFC tests includes an anaphylactic reaction. On the other
hand, the test might have nutritional (when the food can be added back to
the diet) social, emotional, and educational (learning which trigger foods
must be avoided, providing safety, and learning about reaction character­
istics, treatment, and threshold) benefits. Some evidence suggests that the
OFC procedure does not increase long-term post-study anxiety and can
improve quality of life whether the food is tolerated or not (Franxman et
al., 2015; Knibb et al., 2012). Guidelines promoting the OFC as a recom­
mended procedure use terminology of “positive” challenge test outcome
to denote that the test elicited symptoms and a “negative” test outcome to
indicate the food was tolerated. (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014;
Sampson et al., 2014). This use of terms is deliberate to avoid terms such
as “passed” and “failed” as outcomes, which carry negative implications
of the patient having “failed” in some manner.
Patients may avoid having the procedure due to fear, disinterest in the
food offered, or misunderstanding about risks or odds of tolerating the
food. They might ingest the food on their own, against medical advice to
undergo the procedure before reintroducing the food into the diet plan
(Davis et al., 2015). Physicians may not offer the procedure due to patient
safety risk, time constraints, lack of trained personnel, and poor reimburse­
ment (Pongracic et al., 2012). Failure to reintroduce the food into the rou­
tine diet after tolerating the OFC has been noted, but the reasons not fully
explored (Miceli Sopo et al., 2016; van Erp et al., 2014). Considering that
OFC is often required to determine a definitive diagnosis of food allergy, it
is clearly underused.
MODALITIES NOT RECOMMENDED FOR ROUTINE USE
Atopy Patch Test
The atopy patch test (APT) is performed in a manner similar to patch
testing that is routinely used to evaluate allergic contact dermatitis, except
that foods are used. The food, presented as a fresh extract or powder, is
generally placed under an aluminum disc on the skin for 48 hours then
removed and with the final test result determined at 72 hours after applica­

110

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

tion. Current guidelines do not recommend the APT for the routine diag­
nosis of food allergies (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson et
al., 2014), based partly on a lack of standardized reagents, methods, and
interpretation of results. The APT may have utility in evaluating non-IgE­
mediated allergy in the context of atopic dermatitis and EoE. Its utility in
the diagnosis of FPIES has not been substantiated (Jarvinen et al., 2012;
Ruffner et al., 2013).
In a systematic review and meta-analysis, three studies were identified
that evaluated the diagnostic utility of the milk APT. Sensitivity was 53 per­
cent (95% CI: 33%-72%) and specificity 88 percent (95% CI: 76%-95%)
(Soares-Weiser et al., 2014). It is notable that despite a rather large number
of studies, few meet criteria for meta-analysis (Isolauri and Turjanmaa,
1996; Keskin et al., 2005; Roehr et al., 2001). Several studies suggest poor
utility of the APT (Alves et al., 2015; Caglayan Sozmen et al., 2015; Cela­
kovska et al., 2010; Mehl et al., 2006). Other studies suggest some utility
of APT for milk, especially for gastrointestinal symptoms or dermatitis
(Boonyaviwat et al., 2015; Chung et al., 2010; Levy et al., 2012; Mowszet
et al., 2014; Nocerino et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2014). The relevance of APT
for EoE remains uncertain, but some studies suggest utility (Chadha et al.,
2014; Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2014; Spergel et al., 2012). An updated
expert panel report on EoE (Liacouras et al., 2011) summarized the results
from seven studies, with negative predictive values of more than 90 percent
and only 50 percent for milk, and variable positive predictive values. They
suggested the APT (along with SPT and sIgE) can be used to identify foods
associated with EoE, but alone the test is not sufficient to make a diagnosis
of food-driven disease.
Total IgE
Guidelines recommend against the routine measurement of total IgE to
diagnose food allergy (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014). It is recog­
nized that atopic persons may have elevated serum total IgE, but this does
not provide guidance regarding the risk of specific food allergies. However,
there is a notion that total IgE concentration may relate to sIgE (Federly et
al., 2013) and that very high concentration of total IgE may influence the
clinical relevance of sIgE for diagnostic purposes (Muraro et al., 2014).
Theoretically, the influence of total IgE on the clinical relevance of sIgE
includes assay and in vivo effects due to competition for binding to allergen
and effector cells (Hamilton and Williams, 2010). The FDA recommends
that very low concentrations of sIgE antibodies should be evaluated with
caution when total IgE values are above 1,000 kU/L (Merkel et al., 2015)
(http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/Tipsand
ArticlesonDeviceSafety/ucm109367.htm [accessed August 30, 2016]). One

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

111

of the few clinical studies (Mehl et al., 2005) evaluated 992 controlled
OFCs performed in 501 children, looking at the utility of sIgE:total IgE
ratio and found a correlation with challenge outcomes for milk, egg, and
wheat, but not for soy. The diagnostic value of the ratio was not better
than for sIgE alone. In contrast, another study looking at the ratio evalu­
ated 195 OFCs among 161 children, and found that the ratio was more
informative than sIgE alone for peanut, tree nuts, seeds, and shellfish but
not milk, egg, wheat, or soy (Gupta et al., 2014). In contrast, the compo­
nent specific to total IgE ratio did not improve peanut or hazelnut diagnosis
(Grabenhenrich et al., 2016).
Although the NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines and AAAAI Guidelines
concluded that total IgE is not recommended for routine use in diagnosis
(Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014), the EAACI Guidelines based on
low-level evidence and expert opinion suggested that total IGE concentra­
tion may be useful in patients with severe eczema because a very high total
IgE suggests that positive sIgE should be interpreted with care, as possibly
representing asymptomatic sensitization (Muraro et al., 2014).
Basophil Activation Test
Basophils are allergy effector cells found in whole blood. Basophils
degranulate upon cross-linking of sIgE, which is bound to the high affinity
IgE cell surface receptors, and release mediators such as histamine. The
granule marker, CD63, or CD203c, an activation marker, can be measured
by flow cytometry and provide a measure of basophil activation. The
basophil activation test (BAT) is conducted by exposing the basophil cells
to various concentrations of the allergen to be tested, either an extract or
individual component proteins in the test tube. The readout is the number
of cells responding, or the concentration of allergen at which 50 percent of
the cells respond. About 10 percent of people are BAT nonresponders, even
though they are allergic and have positive skin tests. The test is a functional
assay akin to a provocation test, such as a SPT.
Guidelines suggest not using the BAT clinically on the grounds that it
is nonstandardized, but recognize its use as a research tool (Boyce et al.,
2010). A position paper from a task force of the EAACI reviewed the BAT
and made a number of recommendations in favor of using the test for
diagnosis and monitoring of food allergy, and a recommendation to pursue
standardization to make it available in diagnostic laboratories (Hoffmann
et al., 2015). The EAACI task force evaluated diagnostic studies on peanut
(N=4), hazelnut (N=2), peach (N=3), wheat (N=4), milk (N=2), egg (N=2),
shellfish (N=1), and pollen-associated food allergy syndrome (PFAS) (N=5).
The reported sensitivity ranged from 77 to 98 percent and specificity from
75 to 100 percent. In some studies BAT was more accurate than SPT or

112

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

sIgE. In a series of peanut allergy studies from one research group, which
included a validation substudy, the BAT significantly improved diagnosis
over SPT and sIgE, reducing the number of OFCs required for diagnosis
(Santos et al., 2014) and provided predictive value for severity and thresh­
old of reactivity (Santos et al., 2015). The position paper also reviewed the
use of BAT to predict development of tolerance in food allergic children
(N=4 studies), and to monitor responses to immunomodulatory therapy
(N=11 studies). Overall, while the test is not available for widespread use,
the potential utility is recognized and will require additional validation and
standardization.
NONSTANDARDIZED AND UNPROVEN PROCEDURES
A number of tests have been referred to as “unproven,” “unconven­
tional,” or “nonstandardized and unproven” by guidelines and are not
recommended for food allergy diagnosis (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al.,
2014; Sampson et al., 2014). These tests or procedures include: allergenspecific IgA, IgG or IgG4, provocation neutralization, immune complexes,
HLA screening, lymphocyte stimulation, facial thermography, gastric juice
analysis, endoscopic allergen provocation, hair analysis, applied kinesiol­
ogy, cytotoxic assays, electrodermal testing, mediator release assays, bio­
resonance, and iridology. The rationale for not recommending these tests
or procedures is the lack of evidence demonstrating the value of each
method in diagnosis of food allergy. There is a concern that use of these
methods may result in false positive or false negative diagnoses that may
lead to unnecessary dietary restriction or may delay appropriate diagnostic
evaluations.
For example, IgG4 testing against foods as a diagnostic modality was
reviewed in the 2008 EAACI Task Force report (Stapel et al., 2008). Many
serum samples have positive IgG4 results without corresponding clinical
symptoms. The report noted a lack of convincing evidence for histaminereleasing properties of IgG4, and a lack of controlled studies to determine
diagnostic value. Conversely, evidence suggests that food-specific IgG4
reflects exposure, and may indicate a state of immunological tolerance. The
task force concluded that testing of IgG4 to foods is irrelevant to the labo­
ratory work-up for diagnosis of food allergy. It should be noted, however,
that food-specific IgG and IgG4 responses, when monitored during immune
therapy with allergen exposure, is associated with clinical improvement in
threshold. Thus, IgG and IgG4 may be markers or mechanisms of desensi­
tization and may have some role in diagnosis, especially during treatments,
when considered along with other measurements, such as sIgE. Studies have
begun to evaluate the diagnostic or prognostic potential of the IgE/IgG ratio
or antibody classes. More studies are needed to validate these approaches,

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

113

as currently available data are conflicting (Ahrens et al., 2010; Caubet et
al., 2012; Dannaeus and Inganas, 1981; Okamoto et al., 2012; Savilahti
et al., 2012, 2014; Sverremark-Ekström et al., 2012; Tomicic et al., 2009).
PREDICTION OF SEVERITY OR THRESHOLD OF REACTIONS
Severity of an allergy is typically defined by symptoms triggered during
an allergic reaction, and threshold of exposure for a reaction refers to the
dose of allergen that triggers symptoms. There is strong interest in, and
need for, a test for severity or threshold. Dosing during OFC is generally
stopped before severe symptoms, limiting the ability of this study design to
predict severe reactions (Wainstein et al., 2010). No comprehensive reviews
have been published on the prediction of severity or on simple tests to
diagnose the severity of a reaction. One might surmise that increasing sIgE
concentrations correlate with severity because they correlate with risk of
clinical reactivity. Although a number of studies suggest this correlation, it
has not been universally substantiated (Benhamou et al., 2008; Blumchen et
al., 2014; Clark and Ewan, 2003; Neuman-Sunshine et al., 2012; RolinckWerninghaus et al., 2012; Summers et al., 2008; Ta et al., 2011; van der
Zee et al., 2011; Wainstein et al., 2010). In addition, CRD could be con­
sidered a means to possibly diagnose severity of a reaction because, for
example, isolated binding to Ara h 8 is associated with no or mild allergy
(oral-pharyngeal symptoms, related to PFAS) while binding to Ara h 2 is
associated with systemic peanut allergy. However, on an individual patient
or research study participant basis, degree of binding to Ara h 2 does not
appear to accurately predict severity (Astier et al., 2006; Klemans et al.,
2013a,b; Leo et al., 2015; Peeters et al., 2007). Studies have suggested that
modalities such as BAT (Homsak et al., 2013; Santos et al., 2015; Song et
al., 2015) or analysis of epitope3 binding patterns (Flinterman et al., 2008;
Shreffler et al., 2004) may hold promise for determining severity. Disparities
in prediction of severity based on testing may have many methodological
reasons, but on an individual basis, outside of studies that control for such
variables, the tests may not or do not currently consider specific patientcircumstance variables, such as whether the individual with food allergy
has asthma, is currently ill, exercising, or experiencing other factors that
may cause increased sensitivity (i.e., eliciting factors, other factors regard­
ing physiologic responses) (Summers et al., 2008; Vadas et al., 2008). A
recent paper describes the lack of predictability, perceptions about severity,
and the types of factors that may affect the severity of a reaction, including
those related to a person’s behaviors (e.g., exercise) and other factors (e.g.,
infections) (Turner et al., 2016).
3 Epitopes are segments of a protein that are recognized by antibodies.

114

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

PROGNOSIS AND DISEASE MONITORING
The rate of allergy resolution varies based on the food, patient’s age,
pathophysiology of the allergy, and other factors (Boyce et al., 2010;
Sampson et al., 2014). Table 4-3 summarizes resolution rates of common
food allergies (Savage et al., 2016). Most children with allergies to cow
milk, egg, soy, and wheat will develop tolerance by adulthood, whereas
resolution of peanut, tree nut, and seafood allergies is less likely (less than
or equal to 20 percent) (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014). Adults
with food allergies may have experienced persistence from childhood or
may have a new onset in adulthood, and these allergies tend to persist.
The natural course of food allergy is not known for most foods. Periodic
re-evaluation with testing is recommended and can be individualized based
on patient characteristics, the food, and underlying food allergic disorder
(Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014). In general, periodic re-evaluation
is undertaken with history, SPT, sIgE, and OFC depending on the specific
results of each test and history. This testing might be performed more
frequently (e.g., yearly) for a young child with food allergies, and less fre­
quently (e.g., every few years) for an adult with allergies to foods such as
peanut, tree nuts, and seafood.
Unfortunately, no simple accurate prognostic tests exist. Having tests
that could be performed early in life that reflect prognosis would be help­
ful in selecting the best periodicity of retesting, providing anticipatory
guidance, and identifying which patients might benefit from interventional
treatments (as these become available). Studies have suggested that higher
compared to lower concentrations of sIgE or skin test size are a poor
prognostic marker (Ho et al., 2008; Keet et al., 2009; Peters et al., 2013,
2015; Savage et al., 2007, 2010; Sicherer et al., 2014; Skripak et al., 2007;
Wood et al., 2013). However, additional clinical factors are associated with
prognosis, including severity of symptoms, threshold dose, family history,
change in sIgE over time, ability to tolerate milk or egg in baked goods (for
cow milk and egg allergy), comorbid asthma, and comorbid atopic dermati­
tis (including severity), and other factors (Cantani and Micera, 2004; Elizur
et al., 2012; Ho et al., 2008; Peters et al., 2013, 2014, 2015; Savage et al.,
2007; Shek et al., 2004; Sicherer et al., 2014; Skripak et al., 2007; Wood
et al., 2013). Studies have used multivariate analysis to create predictive
models using the variables with the greatest impact (especially sIgE levels),
but validation is needed (Sicherer et al., 2014; Wood et al., 2013). Studies
using newer in vitro tests, such as CRD and BAT, have not been extensively
applied to develop prognostic algorithms. A 2013 systematic search and
review on this topic identified 26 articles, noting heterogeneity and biases
in the studies, and concluded that population-based, prospective studies are
needed that use OFC—without bias of test results—to diagnose food allergy

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

115

TABLE 4-3 Natural Course of Food Allergy
Food

Resolution Likely

Milk, egg, wheat, soy

Early-late childhood
(~>70-80%)

Peanut

Childhood (~20%)

Tree nut

Childhood (~10%)

Fish, shellfish, seeds

Less certain but likely
similar to tree nuts

SOURCE: Savage et al., 2016.

at baseline and then to follow up to develop thresholds for SPT and sIgE
that predict the course of food allergy (Peters et al., 2013). Little is known
about food allergy prognosis after diagnosis in adulthood.
Many of the modalities discussed here also have been evaluated dur­
ing treatment studies, to identify markers that may indicate desensitization
or tolerance of food(s) to which individuals are initially allergic, including
sIgE, SPT, CRD, BAT, sIgE/total IgE ratio, sIgG4, and ratio of sIgE to sIgG4
(Nozawa et al., 2014; Savilahti et al., 2014; Thyagarajan et al., 2012;
Vickery et al., 2013, 2014). Additional markers have been followed, includ­
ing cytokines, regulatory T cells, T cell number and function, and B cell
activity (Bedoret et al., 2012; Hoh et al., 2016; Syed et al., 2014; Varshney
et al., 2011). However, biomarkers to confirm desensitization and tolerance
without OFC remain to be found.
GENERAL DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHMS
Guidelines and reviews have suggested general algorithms (i.e., panels)
for diagnostic approaches (Greenhawt et al., 2013; Muraro et al., 2014;
Sicherer, 2002; Urisu et al., 2014; Venter et al., 2013). Approaches typi­
cally begin with a medical history to identify the nature of the symptoms
(whether likely reflecting food allergy or another disorder), the pathophysi­
ology (IgE mediated or not), and the potential food triggers. Testing based
on the initial impressions is conducted and interpreted based on the results
of the history and suspected foods and related pathophysiology. This may
include tests for IgE, elimination diets and/or OFCs, depending on the
circumstances.
Different algorithms may fit specific disorders. For example, evaluation
of food allergy in acute anaphylaxis, where symptoms come on quickly and
are associated with sIgE antibodies, differs from evaluation of the role of
food allergy in atopic dermatitis or EoE (Greenhawt et al., 2013; Sicherer,

116

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

2002; Urisu et al., 2014; Venter et al., 2013). No overarching approach has
been universally accepted. However, because the sensitivity and specificity
of individual tests are generally not 100 percent, using pretest probability
obtained from one test (e.g., the medical history) is recognized as beneficial
for interpreting the post-test probability of allergy following a second test
(Muraro et al., 2014). Indiscriminately performing multiple tests is not
recommended (Boyce et al., 2010), but a case can be made for using more
than one test when additional diagnostic value may be obtained. Specific
algorithms may, for example, consider diagnostic values of several tests
performed in series to improve accuracy (Ben-Shoshan et al., 2010; Dang
et al., 2012). Additionally, it may be possible to isolate a number of factors
from the medical history and simple diagnostic tests to estimate the risk
of an allergy, using a standardized approach, but this also needs validation
(DunnGalvin et al., 2011). In summary, although no evidence-based, uni­
versally accepted overarching diagnostic algorithm exists, guidelines pro­
mote step-wise evaluations rather than solely depending upon single tests to
conclude a diagnosis of food allergy in children (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro
et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2014). Information on adults is limited.
TESTING FOR SPECIFIC DISEASE STATES OTHER
THAN ANAPHYLAXIS AND ATOPIC DERMATITIS
As indicated above, diagnostic approaches may vary depending upon
the pathophysiology, epidemiology, and clinical characteristics of particu­
lar food-allergic disorders (Greenhawt et al., 2013; Muraro et al., 2014;
Sicherer, 2002; Urisu et al., 2014; Venter et al., 2013).
Food Protein–Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome
FPIES and food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis are non-IgE­
mediated disorders that lack current means of simple laboratory testing to
identify causal foods or to confirm the diagnosis. Guidelines suggest using
the medical history, resolution of symptoms during dietary elimination,
and recurrence of symptoms upon exposure; for example, during a food
challenge (although not typically necessary for proctocolitis), as a means of
diagnosis (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2014).
For FPIES, guidelines indicate that factors in the history may be so sug­
gestive of the diagnosis that an OFC is not needed. For example, a patient
may have experienced repeated reactions with typical symptoms or severe
symptoms (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014). It also is recognized
that a subset of children may develop IgE antibodies (especially for cow
milk) signifying prolonged course and possibly anaphylactic symptoms that
can warrant periodic testing before using an OFC to evaluate for resolution

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

117

(Caubet et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2014). The APT does not appear to
be useful for diagnosing FPIES (Jarvinen et al., 2012; Ruffner et al., 2013).
Endoscopy and biopsies are not typically needed for diagnosis (Boyce et al.,
2010; Muraro et al., 2014). The OFC for evaluation of FPIES could induce
severe symptoms (e.g., hypotension, methemoglobinemia [unexpected], aci­
demia) and requires caution.
Eosinophilic Gastrointestinal Diseases
Eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases may have both a cellular and IgE
antibody component. No specific diagnostic strategies other than elimina­
tion and OFC have been proposed for identifying the food-specific triggers
in eosinophilic gastroenteritis, and no biomarkers to identify responses are
currently available, making repeated endoscopy/biopsy necessary to iden­
tify responses to treatment. Guidelines suggest considering tests for foodspecific IgE and APT to help identify causal foods, specifically for evaluating
EoE (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014). Testing for food-specific
sIgE also derives from the observation that 15 to 43 percent of patients are
diagnosed with typical IgE-mediated food allergies and up to 80 percent are
sensitized to aeroallergens (Muraro et al., 2014). However, these tests are
not to be depended on to identify causal foods, and the diagnosis of EoE
also requires a trial of proton pump inhibitors, and evaluations to identify
characteristic biopsy results for diagnosis (and to exclude other diagnoses)
(Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2014). Ultimately,
trial elimination diets are needed, with follow-up biopsy to assess resolu­
tion of inflammation.
Pollen-Associated Food Allergy Syndrome
The best approaches for diagnostic testing for PFAS have not been
systematically evaluated. A number of recommendations have been pub­
lished (Sampson et al., 2014). The detailed medical history is important
because the diagnosis should be considered in patients experiencing limited
oropharyngeal symptoms when eating foods (raw) that have cross-reacting
proteins with pollens; it may be noted that symptoms are increased during
and just following the pollen season. Testing for sIgE to pollens is sug­
gested, and performing SPT with fresh food (sometimes termed “prick­
prick” testing which may be performed by pricking the raw fruit or some
of its extracted juice with the skin test device and then pricking the skin)
can also be used to aid diagnosis (Begin et al., 2011; Vlieg-Boerstra et al.,
2013). Such testing is not standardized. The use of commercial extracts
may be less useful because the responsible proteins are labile and may not
be present. It is not understood why only some persons with pollen aller­

118

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

gies experience reactions, or why people with similar pollen allergies may
have different patterns of reactions to different fruits and vegetables. Simple
diagnostic tests lack the ability to differentiate or predict these variations
(Crespo et al., 2002; Pastorello et al., 1994; Rodriguez et al., 2000; Ta et
al., 2015). Variations in reactivity are noted even among cultivars of the
same fruit, or with ripening or storage (Carnes et al., 2006; Sancho et al.,
2006). Systemic reactions to the same foods that trigger PFAS can occur.
The reason for systemic reactions could be explained by having reactivity
to a higher dose of the labile allergen, a greater sensitivity to that allergen
(possibly varying with cofactors such as exercise or illness), or having an
immune response to proteins that are not labile (e.g., lipid transfer proteins)
(Cudowska et al., 2008; Gomez et al., 2014; Pascal et al., 2012; Zuidmeer
and van Ree, 2007). It is possible that CRD or BAT represent a means to
evaluate this difference in risk, but studies have had mixed results (Asero,
2014; Ebo et al., 2010; Erdmann et al., 2005; Gamboa et al., 2009; Guhsl
et al., 2015; Hofmann et al., 2013; Tolkki et al., 2013).
COMMON PITFALLS AND MISCONCEPTIONS IN DIAGNOSTICS
As indicated previously, diagnostic and monitoring tests have a variety
of limitations that, if not appreciated, can result in over- or underdiagnos­
ing food allergy in patients. Table 4-4 summarizes common misconceptions.
Sensitization Is Not Diagnostic of Clinical Allergy
Key among potential pitfalls is the fact that sensitization (demon­
strated by a positive test) is not a sole indication for a diagnosis. Testing
with panels (i.e., preselected lists) of foods without a consideration of the
medical history can result in unnecessary concerns and is not recommended
(Bernstein et al., 2008; Cox et al., 2008; Sampson et al., 2014; Sicherer and
Wood, 2012). Physicians may not appreciate this test limitation (Gupta et
al., 2010) and, as reviewed above, patients and clinicians may misinterpret
test results with low values versus higher values as reflecting severity of the
allergy.
Clinically Relevant and Nonrelevant Cross Reactivity
Another potential pitfall is recognizing the difference between cross
reactivity identified on testing (sIgE or SPT) that may or may not be clini­
cally relevant (Sampson et al., 2014; Sicherer, 2001). When food allergens
share sufficient homology, antibodies may be detected to multiple allergen
proteins, but the clinical relevance of the test finding can vary. For example,
a large proportion of individuals with peanut allergy will test positive to

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

119

TABLE 4-4 Common Misconceptions About Food Allergy and Testing
Misconception

Reality

It is possible to do a comprehensive test
that finds which foods should be avoided
to stop the symptoms.

No comprehensive test exists to identify all
food allergies. Diagnosis requires a careful
medical history and thoughtful selection of
tests. Doing evaluative “panels” of preselected
tests/foods can be misleading.

A positive skin or blood test identifies an
allergy.

Many people “test positive” to foods that
they can eat without any symptoms. For
example, about 8 percent of people test
positive to peanut, but can eat it without
symptoms.

A negative allergy test means that a food
is safe to eat.

Although this is often true, with some types
of food allergies, or circumstances, the test
can be negative despite a true allergy.

The level on a blood test or the size of
a skin test indicates the severity of a
reaction.

The severity of a reaction is not well reflected
by the tests, because underlying asthma,
individual sensitivity, and other factors, such
as how much of the allergen is eaten, may
influence severity. However, the stronger a
positive test, the more likely a true allergy
exists.

Allergy to one type of food means the
person will have allergy to related foods.

This is not a general rule. For example,
allergy to peanut, a bean, does not necessarily
mean the person will have allergy to other
beans.

Food allergy and food intolerance are the
same.

A food can make a person ill in many ways.
Allergic reactions involve the immune system
and can be severe or fatal. Intolerance, such
as lactose intolerance, does not involve the
immune system and is not life-threatening.

other legumes, such as soy (up to 79 percent), but only a small proportion
of patients (up to 5 percent) will experience allergic reactions to them.
Although the test rate of cross reactivity is higher than the observed rate of
clinical cross reactivity, studies on this topic are limited and likely reflect
results that vary depending upon methodology, patient selection, and geo­
graphic influences, including pollen sensitization. Estimated rates of clinical
cross reactivity among crustacean shellfish is 38 percent, among fish 30 to
75 percent, among tree nuts 12 to 37 percent (varies depending on the nuts;
for example, walnut and pecan are more similar, cashew and pistachio are
more similar), and between wheat and other grains 21 percent. An OFC is
often needed to confirm tolerance if a potentially cross reactive food has not

120

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

already been tolerated in the diet. A serious pitfall can occur if a food tests
positive in panels (and the patient removes it from the diet) when tolerance
has already been proven by inclusion of the food in the diet.
Delayed Anaphylaxis Associated with Mammalian Meats
Although most pitfalls in food allergy diagnosis may occur from overdiagnosis related to misunderstanding of pathophysiology and test utility,
a special case of under- or misdiagnosis involves mammalian meat allergy
(beef, pork, lamb) attributed to sIgE antibodies against a sugar moiety,
galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal) (Commins et al., 2011, 2014;
Hamsten et al., 2013; Kennedy et al., 2013). The syndrome is likely associ­
ated with initial sensitization to allergen in tick bites. In contrast to typical
food anaphylaxis that occurs within minutes to 2 hours following inges­
tion of the trigger food, alpha-gal-related reactions to mammalian meat,
with the same allergic symptoms, occur 3 to 6 hours after ingestion. Skin
testing to the trigger foods may not be strongly positive but in vitro sIgE
testing to alpha-gal is commercially available and can be used to confirm
the diagnosis. The reason for the delay in onset of anaphylactic symptoms
is not known with certainty.
ROLE OF ELICITING FACTORS
Eliciting factors, also referred to as cofactors and augmentation factors,
are circumstances or ingestants that can alter threshold or severity of an
allergy, resulting in more serious reactions or allowing clinical expression
of a food allergic response to an otherwise tolerated food (Boyce et al.,
2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2014). These factors can include
exercise, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) agents, alcohol,
body temperature, menstruation, infections, stress, and antacid medications
(Niggemann and Beyer, 2014). These factors may influence absorption or
immune responses. The best described entity is food-associated (depen­
dent), exercise-induced anaphylaxis, where the food is tolerated when
exercise does not occur, but reactions may occur when the food is ingested
before exercise. Common food allergenic foods that trigger a reaction with
exercise are wheat, shrimp, and celery, but numerous triggers have been
reported (Romano et al., 2001).
The possibility that a cofactor is responsible for the expression of a
food allergy is assessed by history, and assessment may include evaluation
by SPT or sIgE of foods ingested before exercise or concomitant ingestion
of alcohol or NSAIDs. A case can be made for evaluating specific allergens
associated with these syndromes, such as gliadin and lipid transfer proteins
in some settings, but the diagnostic utility is not fully understood (Muraro

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

121

et al., 2014; Romano et al., 2012; Urisu et al., 2014). The history and sup­
porting test evidence may warrant the diagnosis, but OFC with exposure
to the eliciting factor may be needed. The reliability of such testing is vari­
able, and the symptoms can recur despite an OFC not triggering reactions.
Many factors may confuse the diagnostic approach, such as the need for
multiple different or a combination of augmenting factors to result in a
reaction, various degrees of the factor (amount of food, exercise, alcohol),
and testing methodology (Asaumi et al., 2016; Brockow et al., 2015; Jo et
al., 2012; Medrala et al., 2014; Niggemann and Beyer, 2014).
FUTURE DIAGNOSTIC MODALITIES
Food allergy guidelines have recognized a large number of approaches
under investigation to improve diagnosis and provide insights on progno­
sis and severity (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014; Sampson et al.,
2014). Many of these approaches have been reviewed above (CRD, BAT,
and others). The diagnostic value of determining the pattern of IgE binding
to synthetic sequential epitopes (binding segments) of allergens has been
evaluated, with results suggesting that this testing can provide information
on phenotype (i.e., ability to tolerate extensively heated milk in those with
cow milk allergy), prognosis, and severity (e.g., diversity of binding associ­
ated with severity of reactions) (Cerecedo et al., 2008; Flinterman et al.,
2008; Jarvinen et al, 2001, 2002; Lin et al., 2012; Shreffler et al., 2004;
Wang et al., 2010).
As reviewed above, a number of cellular markers are being evaluated
to improve diagnosis and prognosis, including cytokines, regulatory T cells,
T cell number and function, B cell activity, and epitope binding (Bedoret et
al., 2012; Hoh et al., 2016; Syed et al., 2014; Varshney et al., 2011). One
study suggests value in determining deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) methyla­
tion signatures (Martino et al., 2015). Martino et al. performed genomewide DNA methylation profiling on subjects who had undergone OFC,
concurrent SPTs, and specific IgE tests (Martino et al., 2015). Fifty-eight
were food-sensitized patients (ages 11 to 15 months), half of whom were
clinically reactive, and 13 were nonallergic control subjects. Reproduc­
ibility was assessed in another 48 samples from an independent population
of patients with food allergy. This study revealed a methylation signature
consisting of 96 CpG sites that predict clinical outcomes. This methylation
signature was superior to allergen-specific IgE and SPTs for predicting OFC
outcomes. Therefore, in addition to elucidating mechanisms involved in the
epigenetic regulation of food allergies and the interplay between genetic
and environment, this evidence can be used to develop novel, practical,
and improved diagnostic assays. Bioinformatics approaches that take into
consideration multiple variables should support improved diagnostics (Lin

122

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

et al., 2012). These approaches, which could include data from numerous
biologic markers such as genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolo­
mics, microbiome, and various laboratory tests, will allow for assessment
of billions of variables (Chen et al., 2012).
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
Currently, no simple diagnostic tests exist for food allergy. Selection
and interpretation of tests depend on the disorder being considered (epide­
miology, pathophysiology) and the individual medical history. A common
pitfall in diagnosis results from performing tests for sIgE without consid­
ering the medical history, resulting in unnecessary avoidance or removal
of tolerated foods from the diet (a positive test alone may not indicate a
clinical allergy). The gold standard test, the OFC, carries risk and expense,
and is underused. The history and available test results can often suggest a
likelihood of a food allergy, presenting a reasonable pretest probability for
deciding upon the need for an OFC. Understanding how the size of skin
tests, concentration of sIgE, and the clinical history can provide pretest
probability estimations for providing a diagnosis at this point or proceed­
ing to other tests, including the OFC is key. CRD is currently provid­
ing improved diagnosis in some circumstances. Developing “calculators”
that evaluate these currently available parameters is promising. The BAT
shows promising preliminary data, but validation and commercialization
are needed. Sorely missing are simple tests that would indicate, for an
individual with current possible allergy symptoms, degree of severity or
threshold or both, as well as prognosis.
As reviewed in the discussion above, food allergy testing strategies
(history, diagnostic elimination diet, OFC, SPT, sIgE, CRD, APT) are gen­
erally not well standardized, including the various factors involved with
the history, elimination diets, and food challenge. Many methodologic
issues are involved in evaluating test utility, and comparisons of diagnostic
utility of specific tests among different populations often show some level
of disparity. Regarding SPTs, extracts are not uniformly standardized and
the individual allergenic protein content may vary (Hefle et al., 1995).
The FDA has approved three automated systems to determine sIgE. Each
system uses slightly different methods and results from one system are not
directly comparable to others (Hamilton and Williams, 2010; Hamilton et
al., 2011; Wang et al., 2008). The manner of reporting SPT skin test sizes
varies (e.g., reporting greatest wheal diameter, mean wheal diameter, size in
relation to controls), as does the representation of sIgE levels from serum
tests (e.g., classes versus concentration, kUA/L). Different OFC regimens
have been proposed in the literature as well as different means to report

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

123

results. Attention to these issues affects research approaches as well as clini­
cal care. Studies are under way to improve standardization.
Additional standardization and validation would require extensive
study in different patient populations (e.g., ages, illnesses, geographic
regions) and consideration of the role of eliciting factors, and circumstances
where interventions are being applied to the patient (immunotherapeutic
strategies as they become available). This is similarly the case for emerging
diagnostics, such as epitope analysis.
Education is needed for patients and physicians to understand the
meaning and limitations of commonly used food allergy test results, to
know about unconventional and unproven tests, and to understand how
to effectively use existing tests (or when to refer from primary care to spe­
cialist care). No comprehensive studies on the cost effectiveness of testing
and misdiagnosis have been conducted. Studies on diagnostics have been
primarily focused on children, and more studies of adults or comparison of
adults and children are needed. Numerous potential diagnostic tests are in
development. At this point, they are labor-intensive or expensive, but they
may identify novel factors of use in the future.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The committee recommends that physicians use evidence-based,
standardized procedures as the basis for food allergy diagnosis
and avoid nonstandardized and unproven procedures (e.g., applied
kinesiology, immunoglobulin G panels, electrodermal testing).
When food allergy is suspected, a patient should be evaluated by a
physician who has the training and experience to select and inter­
pret appropriate diagnostic tests.
Although this process often may include an initial evaluation
by a primary physician, it is important that those with suspected
food allergy be diagnosed appropriately, which is likely to involve
referral to or consultation with a physician specialist who can
diagnose, comprehensively evaluate, and manage the food allergy.
Food allergy evaluation procedures include a medical history
and physical examination, and also may include food-specific skin
prick test, food-specific serum immunoglobulin E test, diagnostic
food elimination diet, and oral food challenge (OFC). Selection
of the specific tests needs to be individualized based on the medi­
cal history of each patient. Health care providers trained in food
allergy, leaders of health care facilities, and health care payor
groups can facilitate the appropriate use of OFCs, including per­
sonnel, facilities, and safety guards, so that physicians are not

124

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

deterred from performing the types of diagnostic testing that are
appropriate for the patient’s diagnosis and care.
RESEARCH NEEDS
Diagnosis of food allergy is complex, currently requiring expertise in
assessing the medical history, understanding allergen cross-reactivity, under­
standing eliciting factors that may alter reactivity, selecting and interpreting
imperfect tests, and possibly conducting a medically supervised OFC test.
The OFC is currently the best diagnostic test to confirm an allergy, but it
is time consuming, expensive, carries risks (e.g., the risk of triggering an
allergic reaction), and is often deferred due to patient and physician con­
cerns. Therefore, the OFC is underused. In addition, commonly available
simple allergy tests (sIgE antibody tests or SPT) have limitations that can
result in misdiagnosis, primarily overdiagnosis, requiring procedures such
as OFCs to confirm a proper diagnosis. For example, currently available,
simple diagnostic tests that are often used to diagnose IgE-mediated food
allergies, the sIgE test and SPT, actually diagnose sensitization, not food
allergy. A variety of diagnostic tests, such as CRD, the basophil activation
test, and many others, are emerging or under study and may better inform
diagnosis, prognosis, severity, and threshold.
To fill gaps in knowledge in this area, studies should be conducted to
accomplish the following objectives:

•

•
•

Optimize the currently available diagnostic tests and validate meth­
ods, such as OFC (including in special contexts, such as OFC in
infants and young children), as well as pursue additional novel
tests to improve diagnosis, prognosis, determination of severity of
disease, and assessment of antigen thresholds, and to monitor host
responses. These tests will be valuable in assessing the effectiveness
and durability of interventions, such as immunotherapy. These
studies should include all affected patient populations (ages, sexes,
ethnicities, co-morbidities, socioeconomic strata, should consider
the role of eliciting factors (such as exercise and infections), and
also should be assessed in those circumstances where interventions
are being applied to the patient (immunotherapeutic strategies as
they become available).
Comprehensively examine the utility, cost-effectiveness of, and
barriers to testing, especially regarding the OFC, with a goal of
maximizing the use of appropriate tests.
Examine and assess educational approaches and tools to improve
physician and health care provider education about both the natu­

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

•

125

ral history of food allergies and the appropriate approaches to use
to diagnose food allergies.
Study the utility of emerging technologies in the area of “omics”
methodologies (e.g., genomics, epigenomics, metabolomics). In
particular, identify reliable and clinically useful biomarkers for the
following important goals:
o Assessing the severity of a food allergy (e.g., to identify those
at high risk for anaphylaxis),
o Evaluating and monitoring responses to therapy (e.g.,
immunotherapy),
o Predicting prognosis (e.g., predicting severity),
o Identifying populations at risk of developing a food allergy so
that they can be included when conducting research on preven­
tion and management strategies and on public health guidelines,
and
o Diagnosing food allergy in individuals and populations (e.g., for
collecting data on prevalence).
REFERENCES

Agabriel, C., O. Ghazouani, J. Birnbaum, V. Liabeuf, F. Porri, M. Gouitaa, I. Cleach, J. J.
Grob, P. Bongrand, J. Sarles, and J. Vitte. 2014. Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 sensitization
predicts peanut allergy in Mediterranean pediatric patients. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
25(7):662-667.
Ahrens, B., L. C. Lopes de Oliveira, G. Schulz, M. P. Borres, B. Niggemann, U. Wahn, and K.
Beyer. 2010. The role of hen’s egg-specific IgE, IgG and IgG4 in the diagnostic procedure
of hen’s egg allergy. Allergy 65(12):1554-1557.
Alves, F. A., M. F. Cheik, A. C. de Napolis, E. R. Rezende, C. P. Barros, and G. R. Segundo.
2015. Poor utility of the atopy patch test in infants with fresh rectal bleeding. Ann Al­
lergy Asthma Immunol 115(2):161-162.
Asarnoj, A., C. Nilsson, J. Lidholm, S. Glaumann, E. Ostblom, G. Hedlin, M. van Hage, G.
Lilja, and M. Wickman. 2012. Peanut component Ara h 8 sensitization and tolerance to
peanut. J Allergy Clin Immunol 130(2):468-472.
Asaumi, T., N. Yanagida, S. Sato, A. Shukuya, M. Nishino, and M. Ebisawa. 2016. Provo­
cation tests for the diagnosis of food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol 27(1):44-49.
Asero, R. 2014. In patients with LTP syndrome food-specific IgE show a predictable hierarchi­
cal order. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol 46(4):142-146.
Astier, C., M. Morisset, O. Roitel, F. Codreanu, S. Jacquenet, P. Franck, V. Ogier, N. Petit, B.
Proust, D. A. Moneret-Vautrin, A. W. Burks, B. Bihain, H. A. Sampson, and G. Kanny.
2006. Predictive value of skin prick tests using recombinant allergens for diagnosis of
peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 118(1):250-256.

126

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Ballmer-Weber, B. K., J. Lidholm, M. Fernandez-Rivas, S. Seneviratne, K. M. Hanschmann,
L. Vogel, P. Bures, P. Fritsche, C. Summers, A. C. Knulst, T. M. Le, I. Reig, N. G.
Papadopoulos, A. Sinaniotis, S. Belohlavkova, T. Popov, T. Kralimarkova, F. de Blay,
A. Purohit, M. Clausen, M. Jedrzejczak-Czechowcz, M. L. Kowalski, R. Asero, R.
Dubakiene, L. Barreales, E. N. Clare Mills, R. van Ree, and S. Vieths. 2015. IgE recogni­
tion patterns in peanut allergy are age dependent: Perspectives of the EuroPrevall study.
Allergy 70(4):391-407.
Bedoret, D., A. K. Singh, V. Shaw, E. G. Hoyte, R. Hamilton, R. H. DeKruyff, L. C. Schneider,
K. C. Nadeau, and D. T. Umetsu. 2012. Changes in antigen-specific T-cell number and
function during oral desensitization in cow’s milk allergy enabled with omalizumab.
Mucosal Immunol 5(3):267-276.
Begin, P., A. Des Roches, M. Nguyen, M. S. Masse, J. Paradis, and L. Paradis. 2011. Freezing
does not alter antigenic properties of fresh fruits for skin testing in patients with birch
tree pollen-induced oral allergy syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol 127(6):1624-1626.
Benhamou, A. H., S. A. Zamora, and P. A. Eigenmann. 2008. Correlation between specific
immunoglobulin E levels and the severity of reactions in egg allergic patients. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol 19(2):173-179.
Ben-Shoshan, M., R. Kagan, M. N. Primeau, R. Alizadehfar, E. Turnbull, L. Harada, C.
Dufresne, M. Allen, L. Joseph, Y. St Pierre, and A. Clarke. 2010. Establishing the diag­
nosis of peanut allergy in children never exposed to peanut or with an uncertain history:
A cross-Canada study. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 21(6):920-926.
Berneder, M., M. Bublin, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, T. Hawranek, and R. Lang. 2013.
Allergen chip diagnosis for soy-allergic patients: Gly m 4 as a marker for severe foodallergic reactions to soy. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 161(3):229-233.
Bernstein, I. L., J. T. Li, D. I. Bernstein, R. Hamilton, S. L. Spector, R. Tan, S. Sicherer, D. B.
Golden, D. A. Khan, R. A. Nicklas, J. M. Portnoy, J. Blessing-Moore, L. Cox, D. M.
Lang, J. Oppenheimer, C. C. Randolph, D. E. Schuller, S. A. Tilles, D. V. Wallace, E.
Levetin, and R. Weber. 2008. Allergy diagnostic testing: An updated practice parameter.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 100(3 Suppl 3):S1-S148.
Beyer, K., L. Grabenhenrich, M. Hartl, A. Beder, B. Kalb, M. Ziegert, A. Finger, N. Harandi,
R. Schlags, M. Gappa, L. Puzzo, H. Roblitz, M. Millner-Uhlemann, S. Busing, H. Ott,
L. Lange, and B. Niggemann. 2015. Predictive values of component-specific IgE for the
outcome of peanut and hazelnut food challenges in children. Allergy 70(1):90-98.
Blumchen, K., A. Beder, J. Beschorner, F. Ahrens, A. Gruebl, E. Hamelmann, G. Hansen, A.
Heinzmann, K. Nemat, B. Niggemann, U. Wahn, and K. Beyer. 2014. Modified oral food
challenge used with sensitization biomarkers provides more real-life clinical thresholds
for peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 134(2):390-398.
Boonyaviwat, O., P. Pacharn, O. Jirapongsananuruk, P. Vichyanond, and N. Visitsunthorn.
2015. Role of atopy patch test for diagnosis of food allergy-related gastrointestinal
symptoms in children. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 26(8):737-741.
Boyce, J. A., A. Assa’ad, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, H. A. Sampson, R. A. Wood, M. Plaut,
S. F. Cooper, M. J. Fenton, S. H. Arshad, S. L. Bahna, L. A. Beck, C. Byrd-Bredbenner,
C. A. Camargo, Jr., L. Eichenfield, G. T. Furuta, J. M. Hanifin, C. Jones, M. Kraft, B. D.
Levy, P. Lieberman, S. Luccioli, K. M. McCall, L. C. Schneider, R. A. Simon, F. E. Simons,
S. J. Teach, B. P. Yawn, and J. M. Schwaninger. 2010. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: Report of the NIAID-sponsored expert
panel. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(6 Suppl):S1-S58.
Brockow, K., D. Kneissl, L. Valentini, O. Zelger, M. Grosber, C. Kugler, M. Werich, U. Darsow, H. Matsuo, E. Morita, and J. Ring. 2015. Using a gluten oral food challenge pro­
tocol to improve diagnosis of wheat-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 135(4):977-984.

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

127

Caffarelli, C., and T. Petroccione. 2001. False-negative food challenges in children with sus­
pected food allergy. Lancet 358(9296):1871-1872.
Caglayan Sozmen, S., C. Povesi Dascola, E. Gioia, C. Mastrorilli, L. Rizzuti, and C. Caffarelli.
2015. Diagnostic accuracy of patch test in children with food allergy. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 26(5):416-422.
Canonica, G. W., I. J. Ansotegui, R. Pawankar, P. Schmid-Grendelmeier, M. van Hage, C. E.
Baena-Cagnani, G. Melioli, C. Nunes, G. Passalacqua, L. Rosenwasser, H. Sampson, J.
Sastre, J. Bousquet, and T. Zuberbier. 2013. A WAO - ARIA - GA2LEN consensus docu­
ment on molecular-based allergy diagnostics. World Allergy Organ J 6(1):17.
Cantani, A., and M. Micera. 2004. Natural history of cow’s milk allergy. An eight-year followup study in 115 atopic children. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 8(4):153-164.
Carnes, J., A. Ferrer, and E. Fernandez-Caldas. 2006. Allergenicity of 10 different apple variet­
ies. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 96(4):564-570.
Caubet, J. C., R. Bencharitiwong, E. Moshier, J. H. Godbold, H. A. Sampson, and A. NowakWegrzyn. 2012. Significance of ovomucoid- and ovalbumin-specific IgE/IgG(4) ratios in
egg allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 129(3):739-747.
Caubet, J. C., L. S. Ford, L. Sickles, K. M. Jarvinen, S. H. Sicherer, H. A. Sampson, and A.
Nowak-Wegrzyn. 2014. Clinical features and resolution of food protein-induced entero­
colitis syndrome: 10-year experience. J Allergy Clin Immunol 134(2):382-389.
Celakovska, J., J. Vaneckova, K. Ettlerova, K. Ettler, and J. Bukac. 2010. The role of atopy
patch test in diagnosis of food allergy in atopic eczema/dermatitis syndrom in patients
over 14 years of age. Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove) 53(2):101-108.
Cerecedo, I., J. Zamora, W. G. Shreffler, J. Lin, L. Bardina, M. C. Dieguez, J. Wang, A. Mu­
riel, B. de la Hoz, and H. A. Sampson. 2008. Mapping of the IgE and IgG4 sequential
epitopes of milk allergens with a peptide microarray-based immunoassay. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 122(3):589-594.
Chadha, S. N., L. Wang, H. Correa, D. Moulton, and D. S. Hummell. 2014. Pediatric eo­
sinophilic esophagitis: The Vanderbilt experience. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 113(4):
445-451.
Chafen, J. J., S. J. Newberry, M. A. Riedl, D. M. Bravata, M. Maglione, M. J. Suttorp, V.
Sundaram, N. M. Paige, A. Towfigh, B. J. Hulley, and P. G. Shekelle. 2010. Diagnosing
and managing common food allergies: A systematic review. JAMA 303(18):1848-1856.
Chen, R., G. I. Mias, J. Li-Pook-Than, L. Jiang, H. Y. Lam, R. Chen, E. Miriami, K. J.
Karczewski, M. Hariharan, F. E. Dewey, Y. Cheng, M. J. Clark, H. Im, L. Habegger, S.
Balasubramanian, M. O’Huallachain, J. T. Dudley, S. Hillenmeyer, R. Haraksingh, D.
Sharon, G. Euskirchen, P. Lacroute, K. Bettinger, A. P. Boyle, M. Kasowski, F. Grubert,
S. Seki, M. Garcia, M. Whirl-Carrillo, M. Gallardo, M. A. Blasco, P. L. Greenberg, P.
Snyder, T. E. Klein, R. B. Altman, A. J. Butte, E. A. Ashley, M. Gerstein, K. C. Nadeau,
H. Tang, and M. Snyder. 2012. Personal omics profiling reveals dynamic molecular and
medical phenotypes. Cell 148(6):1293-1307.
Chung, B. Y., H. O. Kim, C. W. Park, and C. H. Lee. 2010. Diagnostic usefulness of the serumspecific IgE, the skin prick test and the atopy patch test compared with that of the oral
food challenge test. Ann Dermatol 22(4):404-411.
Clark, A. T., and P. W. Ewan. 2003. Interpretation of tests for nut allergy in one thousand
patients, in relation to allergy or tolerance. Clin Exp Allergy 33(8):1041-1045.
Commins, S. P., H. R. James, L. A. Kelly, S. L. Pochan, L. J. Workman, M. S. Perza­
nowski, K. M. Kocan, J. V. Fahy, L. W. Nganga, E. Ronmark, P. J. Cooper, and T. A.
Platts-Mills. 2011. The relevance of tick bites to the production of IgE antibodies to
the mammalian oligosaccharide galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose. J Allergy Clin Immunol
127(5):1286-1293.

128

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Commins, S. P., H. R. James, W. Stevens, S. L. Pochan, M. H. Land, C. King, S. Mozzicato,
and T. A. Platts-Mills. 2014. Delayed clinical and ex vivo response to mammalian
meat in patients with IgE to galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose. J Allergy Clin Immunol
134(1):108-115.
Cox, L., B. Williams, S. Sicherer, J. Oppenheimer, L. Sher, R. Hamilton, and D. Golden. 2008.
Pearls and pitfalls of allergy diagnostic testing: Report from the American College of Al­
lergy, Asthma and Immunology/American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology
Specific IgE Test Task Force. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 101(6):580-592.
Crespo, J. F., J. Rodriguez, J. M. James, P. Daroca, M. Reano, and R. Vives. 2002. Reactivity
to potential cross-reactive foods in fruit-allergic patients: Implications for prescribing
food avoidance. Allergy 57(10):946-949.
Cudowska, B., M. Kaczmarski, and P. Restani. 2008. Lipid transfer protein in diagnosis of
birch-apple syndrome in children. Immunobiology 213(2):89-96.
Dang, T. D., M. Tang, S. Choo, P. V. Licciardi, J. J. Koplin, P. E. Martin, T. Tan, L. C. Gurrin,
A. L. Ponsonby, D. Tey, M. Robinson, S. C. Dharmage, and K. J. Allen. 2012. Increas­
ing the accuracy of peanut allergy diagnosis by using Ara h 2. J Allergy Clin Immunol
129(4):1056-1063.
Dannaeus, A., and M. Inganas. 1981. A follow-up study of children with food allergy. Clini­
cal course in relation to serum IgE- and IgG-antibody levels to milk, egg and fish. Clin
Allergy 11(6):533-539.
Davis, N., M. Egan, and S. H. Sicherer. 2015. Factors resulting in deferral of diagnostic oral
food challenges. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(5):811-812.
DunnGalvin, A., D. Daly, C. Cullinane, E. Stenke, D. Keeton, M. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse, G.
C. Roberts, J. Lucas, and J. O. Hourihane. 2011. Highly accurate prediction of food
challenge outcome using routinely available clinical data. J Allergy Clin Immunol
127(3):633-639.
Ebisawa, M., R. Moverare, S. Sato, N. Maruyama, M. P. Borres, and T. Komata. 2012. Mea­
surement of Ara h 1-, 2-, and 3-specific IgE antibodies is useful in diagnosis of peanut
allergy in Japanese children. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 23(6):573-581.
Ebo, D. G., C. H. Bridts, M. M. Verweij, K. J. De Knop, M. M. Hagendorens, L. S. De Clerck,
and W. J. Stevens. 2010. Sensitization profiles in birch pollen-allergic patients with and
without oral allergy syndrome to apple: Lessons from multiplexed component-resolved
allergy diagnosis. Clin Exp Allergy 40(2):339-347.
Elizur, A., N. Rajuan, M. R. Goldberg, M. Leshno, A. Cohen, and Y. Katz. 2012. Natural
course and risk factors for persistence of IgE-mediated cow’s milk allergy. J Pediatr
161(3):482-487.
Eller, E., and C. Bindslev-Jensen. 2013. Clinical value of component-resolved diagnostics in
peanut-allergic patients. Allergy 68(2):190-194.
Erdmann, S. M., B. Sachs, A. Schmidt, H. F. Merk, O. Scheiner, S. Moll-Slodowy, I. Sauer,
R. Kwiecien, B. Maderegger, and K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber. 2005. In vitro analysis
of birch-pollen-associated food allergy by use of recombinant allergens in the basophil
activation test. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 136(3):230-238.
Faber, M. A., M. De Graag, C. Van Der Heijden, V. Sabato, M. M. Hagendorens, C. H. Bridts,
L. S. De Clerck, and D. G. Ebo. 2014. Cor a 14: Missing link in the molecular diagnosis
of hazelnut allergy? Int Arch Allergy Immunol 164(3):200-206.
Federly, T. J., B. L. Jones, H. Dai, and C. Dinakar. 2013. Interpretation of food specific
immunoglobulin E levels in the context of total IgE. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
111(1):20-24.
Fleischer, D. M., S. A. Bock, G. C. Spears, C. G. Wilson, N. K. Miyazawa, M. C. Gleason,
E. A. Gyorkos, J. R. Murphy, D. Atkins, and D. Y. Leung. 2011. Oral food challenges in
children with a diagnosis of food allergy. J Pediatr 158(4):578-583.

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

129

Fleischer, D. M., S. Sicherer, M. Greenhawt, D. Campbell, E. Chan, A. Muraro, S. Halken,
Y. Katz, M. Ebisawa, L. Eichenfield, H. Sampson, G. Lack, G. Du Toit, G. Roberts,
H. Bahnson, M. Feeney, J. Hourihane, J. Spergel, M. Young, A. As’aad, K. Allen, S.
Prescott, S. Kapur, H. Saito, I. Agache, C. A. Akdis, H. Arshad, K. Beyer, A. Dubois, P.
Eigenmann, M. Fernandez-Rivas, K. Grimshaw, K. Hoffman-Sommergruber, A. Host, S.
Lau, L. O’Mahony, C. Mills, N. Papadopoulos, C. Venter, N. Agmon-Levin, A. Kessel,
R. Antaya, B. Drolet, and L. Rosenwasser. 2015. Consensus communication on early
peanut introduction and the prevention of peanut allergy in high-risk infants. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 136(2):258-261.
Flinterman, A. E., E. F. Knol, D. A. Lencer, L. Bardina, C. F. den Hartog Jager, J. Lin, S. G.
Pasmans, C. A. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, H. A. Sampson, E. van Hoffen, and W. G. Shreffler.
2008. Peanut epitopes for IgE and IgG4 in peanut-sensitized children in relation to sever­
ity of peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 121(3):737-743.e710.
Franxman, T. J., L. Howe, E. Teich, and M. J. Greenhawt. 2015. Oral food challenge and
food allergy quality of life in caregivers of children with food allergy. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol Pract 3(1):50-56.
Gamboa, P. M., M. L. Sanz, M. Lombardero, D. Barber, R. Sanchez-Monje, M. J. Goikoetxea,
I. Antepara, M. Ferrer, and G. Salcedo. 2009. Component-resolved in vitro diagnosis in
peach-allergic patients. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 19(1):13-20.
Gomez, F., A. Aranda, P. Campo, A. Diaz-Perales, N. Blanca-Lopez, J. Perkins, M. Garrido,
M. Blanca, C. Mayorga, and M. J. Torres. 2014. High prevalence of lipid transfer protein
sensitization in apple allergic patients with systemic symptoms. PLoS One 9(9):e107304.
Grabenhenrich, L. B., S. Dolle, A. Moneret-Vautrin, A. Kohli, L. Lange, T. Spindler, F. Rueff,
K. Nemat, I. Maris, E. Roumpedaki, K. Scherer, H. Ott, T. Reese, T. Mustakov, R. Lang,
M. Fernandez-Rivas, M. L. Kowalski, M. B. Bilo, J. O. Hourihane, N. G. Papadopoulos,
K. Beyer, A. Muraro, and M. Worm. 2016. Anaphylaxis in children and adolescents: The
European Anaphylaxis Registry. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(4):1128-1137.
Greenhawt, M., S. S. Aceves, J. M. Spergel, and M. E. Rothenberg. 2013. The management
of eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(4):332-340; quiz 341-332.
Grimshaw, K. E., R. M. King, J. A. Nordlee, S. L. Hefle, J. O. Warner, and J. O. Hourihane.
2003. Presentation of allergen in different food preparations affects the nature of the
allergic reaction—A case series. Clin Exp Allergy 33(11):1581-1585.
Guhsl, E. E., G. Hofstetter, N. Lengger, W. Hemmer, C. Ebner, R. Froschl, M. Bublin, C.
Lupinek, H. Breiteneder, and C. Radauer. 2015. IgE, IgG4 and IgA specific to Bet v 1-re­
lated food allergens do not predict oral allergy syndrome. Allergy 70(1):59-66.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, J. S. Kim, B. Smith, J. A. Pongracic, X. Wang, and J. Holl.
2010. Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs of primary care physicians. Pedi­
atrics 125(1):126-132.
Gupta, R. S., C. H. Lau, R. G. Hamilton, A. Donnell, and K. K. Newhall. 2014. Predicting
outcomes of oral food challenges by using the allergen-specific IgE-total IgE ratio. J Al­
lergy Clin Immunol Pract 2(3):300-305.
Gupta, R. S., M. M. Walkner, M. Greenhawt, C. H. Lau, D. Caruso, X. Wang, J. A. Pongracic,
and B. Smith. 2016. Food allergy sensitization and presentation in siblings of food al­
lergic children. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 4(5):956-962.
Hamilton, R. G., and P. B. Williams. 2010. Human IgE antibody serology: A primer for the
practicing North American allergist/immunologist. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(1):33-38.
Hamilton, R. G., K. Mudd, M. A. White, and R. A. Wood. 2011. Extension of food aller­
gen specific IgE ranges from the ImmunoCAP to the IMMULITE systems. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 107(2):139-144.

130

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Hamsten, C., M. Starkhammar, T. A. Tran, M. Johansson, U. Bengtsson, G. Ahlen, M.
Sallberg, H. Gronlund, and M. van Hage. 2013. Identification of galactose-alpha-1,3­
galactose in the gastrointestinal tract of the tick Ixodes ricinus; Possible relationship with
red meat allergy. Allergy 68(4):549-552.
Hefle, S. L., R. M. Helm, A. W. Burks, and R. K. Bush. 1995. Comparison of commercial
peanut skin test extracts. J Allergy Clin Immunol 95(4):837-842.
Ho, M. H., W. H. Wong, R. G. Heine, C. S. Hosking, D. J. Hill, and K. J. Allen. 2008. Early
clinical predictors of remission of peanut allergy in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol
121(3):731-736.
Hoffmann, H. J., A. F. Santos, C. Mayorga, A. Nopp, B. Eberlein, M. Ferrer, P. Rouzaire,
D. G. Ebo, V. Sabato, M. L. Sanz, T. Pecaric-Petkovic, S. U. Patil, O. V. Hausmann,
W. G. Shreffler, P. Korosec, and E. F. Knol. 2015. The clinical utility of basophil activa­
tion testing in diagnosis and monitoring of allergic disease. Allergy 70(11):1393-1405.
Hofmann, C., S. Scheurer, K. Rost, E. Graulich, A. Jamin, K. Foetisch, J. Saloga, S. Vieths, K.
Steinbrink, and H. S. Adler. 2013. Cor a 1-reactive T cells and IgE are predominantly
cross-reactive to Bet v 1 in patients with birch pollen-associated food allergy to hazelnut.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 131(5):1384-1392.
Hoh, R. A., S. A. Joshi, Y. Liu, C. Wang, K. M. Roskin, J. Y. Lee, T. Pham, T. J. Looney, K. J.
Jackson, V. P. Dixit, J. King, S. C. Lyu, J. Jenks, R. G. Hamilton, K. C. Nadeau, and S. D.
Boyd. 2016. Single B-cell deconvolution of peanut-specific antibody responses in allergic
patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(1):157-167.
Homsak, M., M. Silar, V. Berce, M. Tomazin, M. Skerbinjek-Kavalar, N. Celesnik, M. Kosnik,
and P. Korosec. 2013. The relevance of basophil allergen sensitivity testing to distin­
guish between severe and mild peanut-allergic children. Int Arch Allergy Immunol
162(4):310-317.
Isolauri, E., and K. Turjanmaa. 1996. Combined skin prick and patch testing enhances identi­
fication of food allergy in infants with atopic dermatitis. Journal of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology 97(1 Pt 1):9-15.
Jarvinen, K. M., P. Chatchatee, L. Bardina, K. Beyer, and H. A. Sampson. 2001. IgE and IgG
binding epitopes on alpha-lactalbumin and beta-lactoglobulin in cow’s milk allergy. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol 126(2):111-118.
Jarvinen, K. M., K. Beyer, L. Vila, P. Chatchatee, P. J. Busse, and H. A. Sampson. 2002. B-cell
epitopes as a screening instrument for persistent cow’s milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 110(2):293-297.
Jarvinen, K. M., J. C. Caubet, L. Sickles, L. S. Ford, H. A. Sampson, and A. Nowak-Wegrzyn.
2012. Poor utility of atopy patch test in predicting tolerance development in food
protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 109(3):221-222.
Jo, E. J., M. S. Yang, Y. J. Kim, H. S. Kim, M. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, S. H. Cho, K. U. Min, and
Y. S. Chang. 2012. Food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis occurred only in a
warm but not in a cold environment. Asia Pac Allergy 2(2):161-164.
Kattan, J. D., and H. A. Sampson. 2015. Clinical reactivity to soy is best identified by compo­
nent testing to Gly m 8. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(6):970-972.
Kattan, J. D., S. H. Sicherer, and H. A. Sampson. 2014. Clinical reactivity to hazelnut may be
better identified by component testing than traditional testing methods. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 2(5):633-634.
Keet, C. A., E. C. Matsui, G. Dhillon, P. Lenehan, M. Paterakis, and R. A. Wood. 2009. The
natural history of wheat allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 102(5):410-415.
Keet, C. A., K. Johnson, J. H. Savage, R. G. Hamilton, and R. A. Wood. 2013. Evaluation of
Ara h2 IgE thresholds in the diagnosis of peanut allergy in a clinical population. J Allergy
Clin Immunol Pract 1(1):101-103.

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

131

Kennedy, J. L., A. P. Stallings, T. A. Platts-Mills, W. M. Oliveira, L. Workman, H. R. James,
A. Tripathi, C. J. Lane, L. Matos, P. W. Heymann, and S. P. Commins. 2013. Galactose­
alpha-1,3-galactose and delayed anaphylaxis, angioedema, and urticaria in children.
Pediatrics 131(5):e1545-1552.
Keskin, O., A. Tuncer, G. Adalioglu, B. E. Sekerel, C. Sackesen, and O. Kalayci. 2005. Evalu­
ation of the utility of atopy patch testing, skin prick testing, and total and specific IgE as­
says in the diagnosis of cow’s milk allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 94(5):553-560.
Klemans, R. J., H. C. Broekman, E. F. Knol, C. A. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, H. G. Otten, S. G.
Pasmans, and A. C. Knulst. 2013a. Ara h 2 is the best predictor for peanut allergy in
adults. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(6):632-638.
Klemans, R. J., X. Liu, A. C. Knulst, M. J. Knol, F. Gmelig-Meyling, E. Borst, S. G. Pasmans,
and E. F. Knol. 2013b. IgE binding to peanut components by four different techniques:
Ara h 2 is the most relevant in peanut allergic children and adults. Clin Exp Allergy
43(8):967-974.
Klemans, R. J., H. van Os-Medendorp, M. Blankestijn, C. A. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, E. F. Knol,
and A. C. Knulst. 2015. Diagnostic accuracy of specific IgE to components in diagnosing
peanut allergy: A systematic review. Clin Exp Allergy 45(4):720-730.
Knibb, R. C., N. F. Ibrahim, G. Stiefel, R. Petley, A. J. Cummings, R. M. King, D. Keeton, L.
Brown, M. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse, G. Roberts, and J. S. Lucas. 2012. The psychological
impact of diagnostic food challenges to confirm the resolution of peanut or tree nut al­
lergy. Clin Exp Allergy 42(3):451-459.
Kukkonen, A. K., A. S. Pelkonen, S. Makinen-Kiljunen, H. Voutilainen, and M. J. Makela.
2015. Ara h 2 and Ara 6 are the best predictors of severe peanut allergy: A double-blind
placebo-controlled study. Allergy 70(10):1239-1245.
Leo, S. H., J. M. Dean, B. Jung, B. Kuzeljevic, and E. S. Chan. 2015. Utility of Ara h 2 sIgE
levels to predict peanut allergy in Canadian children. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
3(6):968-969.
Levy, S. A., S. D. Dortas Junior, A. H. Pires, A. T. Abe, S. O. Valle, V. P. Coelho, L. R.
Hahnstadt, and A. T. Franca. 2012. Atopy patch test (APT) in the diagnosis of food al­
lergy in children with atopic dermatitis. An Bras Dermatol 87(5):724-728.
Liacouras, C. A., G. T. Furuta, I. Hirano, D. Atkins, S. E. Attwood, P. A. Bonis, A. W.
Burks, M. Chehade, M. H. Collins, E. S. Dellon, R. Dohil, G. W. Falk, N. Gonsalves,
S. K. Gupta, D. A. Katzka, A. J. Lucendo, J. E. Markowitz, R. J. Noel, R. D. Odze,
P. E. Putnam, J. E. Richter, Y. Romero, E. Ruchelli, H. A. Sampson, A. Schoepfer, N. J.
Shaheen, S. H. Sicherer, S. Spechler, J. M. Spergel, A. Straumann, B. K. Wershil, M. E.
Rothenberg, and S. S. Aceves. 2011. Eosinophilic esophagitis: Updated consensus recom­
mendations for children and adults. J Allergy Clin Immunol 128(1):3-20; quiz 21-22.
Lieberman, J. A., S. Glaumann, S. Batelson, M. P. Borres, H. A. Sampson, and C. Nilsson.
2013. The utility of peanut components in the diagnosis of IgE-mediated peanut allergy
among distinct populations.J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(1):75-82.
Lin, J., F. M. Bruni, Z. Fu, J. Maloney, L. Bardina, A. L. Boner, G. Gimenez, and H. A. Samp­
son. 2012. A bioinformatics approach to identify patients with symptomatic peanut al­
lergy using peptide microarray immunoassay. J Allergy Clin Immunol 129(5):1321-1328.
Liu, A. H., R. Jaramillo, S. H. Sicherer, R. A. Wood, S. A. Bock, A. W. Burks, M. Massing,
R. D. Cohn, and D. C. Zeldin. 2010. National prevalence and risk factors for food
allergy and relationship to asthma: Results from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 2005-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(4):798-806.
Lopes de Oliveira, L. C., M. Aderhold, M. Brill, G. Schulz, C. Rolinck-Werninghaus, E. N.
Clare Mills, B. Niggemann, C. K. Naspitz, U. Wahn, and K. Beyer. 2013. The value of
specific IgE to peanut and its component Ara h 2 in the diagnosis of peanut allergy. J
Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(4):394-398.

132

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Lopez-Matas, M. A., C. H. Larramendi, A. J. Huertas, A. Ferrer, R. Moya, J. A. Pagan, L. A.
Navarro, J. L. Garcia-Abujeta, and J. Carnes. 2015. Tomato nsLTP as an “in vivo”
diagnostic tool: Sensitization in a Mediterranean population. J Allergy Clin Immunol
25(3):196-204.
Markowitz, J. E., J. M. Spergel, E. Ruchelli, and C. A. Liacouras. 2003. Elemental diet is an
effective treatment for eosinophilic esophagitis in children and adolescents. Am J Gas­
troenterol 98(4):777-782.
Martino, D., T. Dang, A. Sexton-Oates, S. Prescott, M. L. Tang, S. Dharmage, L. Gurrin,
J. Koplin, A. L. Ponsonby, K. J. Allen, and R. Saffery. 2015. Blood DNA methylation
biomarkers predict clinical reactivity in food-sensitized infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol
135(5):1319-1328.
Masthoff, L. J., L. Mattsson, L. Zuidmeer-Jongejan, J. Lidholm, K. Andersson, J. H. Akkerdaas,
S. A. Versteeg, C. Garino, Y. Meijer, P. Kentie, A. Versluis, C. F. den Hartog Jager, C. A.
Bruijnzeel-Koomen, A. C. Knulst, R. van Ree, E. van Hoffen, and S. G. Pasmans. 2013.
Sensitization to Cor a 9 and Cor a 14 is highly specific for a hazelnut allergy with objec­
tive symptoms in Dutch children and adults. J Allergy Clin Immunol 132(2):393-399.
Medrala, W., K. Cieslik, W. Barg, A. Skotny, E. Siwak, and A. Wolanczyk-Medrala. 2014.
Naproxen increases the severity of food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis: A case
report. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 24(6):461-462.
Mehl, A., A. Verstege, U. Staden, M. Kulig, M. Nocon, K. Beyer, and B. Niggemann. 2005.
Utility of the ratio of food-specific IgE/total IgE in predicting symptomatic food allergy
in children. Allergy 60(8):1034-1039.
Mehl, A., C. Rolinck-Werninghaus, U. Staden, A. Verstege, U. Wahn, K. Beyer, and B.
Niggemann. 2006. The atopy patch test in the diagnostic workup of suspected foodrelated symptoms in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 118(4):923-929.
Merkel, P. A., M. D. O’Sullivan, C. Ridge, and V. Knight. 2015. Critique on the quantitative
nature of IgE antibody measurements. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(6):973-975.
Miceli Sopo, S., S. Monaco, M. Greco, and R. Onesimo. 2016. Prevalence of adverse reactions
following a passed oral food challenge and factors affecting successful re-introduction of
foods. A retrospective study of a cohort of 199 children. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr)
44(1):54-58.
Mowszet, K., K. Matusiewicz, and B. Iwanczak. 2014. Value of the atopy patch test in the
diagnosis of food allergy in children with gastrointestinal symptoms. Adv Clin Exp Med
23(3):403-409.
Muraro, A., T. Werfel, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, G. Roberts, K. Beyer, C. Bindslev-Jensen,
V. Cardona, A. Dubois, G. duToit, P. Eigenmann, M. Fernandez Rivas, S. Halken, L.
Hickstein, A. Host, E. Knol, G. Lack, M. J. Marchisotto, B. Niggemann, B. I. Nwaru,
N. G. Papadopoulos, L. K. Poulsen, A. F. Santos, I. Skypala, A. Schoepfer, R. Van Ree, C.
Venter, M. Worm, B. Vlieg-Boerstra, S. Panesar, D. de Silva, K. Soares-Weiser, A. Sheikh,
B. K. Ballmer-Weber, C. Nilsson, N. W. de Jong, and C. A. Akdis. 2014. EAACI food
allergy and anaphylaxis guidelines: Diagnosis and management of food allergy. Allergy
69(8):1008-1025.
Neuman-Sunshine, D. L., J. A. Eckman, C. A. Keet, E. C. Matsui, R. D. Peng, P. J. Lenehan,
and R. A. Wood. 2012. The natural history of persistent peanut allergy. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 108(5):326-331.
Niggemann, B., and K. Beyer. 2014. Factors augmenting allergic reactions. Allergy 69(12):
1582-1587.
Niggemann, B., L. Lange, A. Finger, M. Ziegert, V. Muller, and K. Beyer. 2012. Accurate oral
food challenge requires a cumulative dose on a subsequent day. J Allergy Clin Immunol
130(1):261-263.

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

133

Nocerino, R., V. Granata, M. Di Costanzo, V. Pezzella, L. Leone, A. Passariello, G. Terrin,
R. Troncone, and R. Berni Canani. 2013. Atopy patch tests are useful to predict oral
tolerance in children with gastrointestinal symptoms related to non-IgE-mediated cow’s
milk allergy. Allergy 68(2):246-248.
Novembre, E., F. Mori, S. Contestabile, M. E. Rossi, and N. Pucci. 2012. Correlation of
anti-Pru p 3 IgE levels with severity of peach allergy reactions in children. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 108(4):271-274.
Nozawa, A., Y. Okamoto, R. Moverare, M. P. Borres, and K. Kurihara. 2014. Monitoring
Ara h 1, 2 and 3-sIgE and sIgG4 antibodies in peanut allergic children receiving oral rush
immunotherapy. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 25(4):323-328.
Okamoto, S., S. Taniuchi, K. Sudo, Y. Hatano, K. Nakano, T. Shimo, and K. Kaneko. 2012.
Predictive value of IgE/IgG4 antibody ratio in children with egg allergy. Allergy Asthma
Clin Immunol 8(1):9.
Pascal, M., R. Munoz-Cano, Z. Reina, A. Palacin, R. Vilella, C. Picado, M. Juan, J. SanchezLopez, M. Rueda, G. Salcedo, A. Valero, J. Yague, and J. Bartra. 2012. Lipid transfer
protein syndrome: Clinical pattern, cofactor effect and profile of molecular sensitization
to plant-foods and pollens. Clin Exp Allergy 42(10):1529-1539.
Pastorello, E. A., C. Ortolani, L. Farioli, V. Pravettoni, M. Ispano, A. Borga, A. Bengtsson,
C. Incorvaia, C. Berti, and C. Zanussi. 1994. Allergenic cross-reactivity among peach,
apricot, plum, and cherry in patients with oral allergy syndrome: An in vivo and in vitro
study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 94(4):699-707.
Peeters, K. A., S. J. Koppelman, E. van Hoffen, C. W. van der Tas, C. F. den Hartog Jager,
A. H. Penninks, S. L. Hefle, C. A. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, E. F. Knol, and A. C. Knulst.
2007. Does skin prick test reactivity to purified allergens correlate with clinical severity
of peanut allergy? Clin Exp Allergy 37(1):108-115.
Peters, R. L., L. C. Gurrin, and K. J. Allen. 2012. The predictive value of skin prick test­
ing for challenge-proven food allergy: A systematic review. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
23(4):347-352.
Peters, R. L., L. C. Gurrin, S. C. Dharmage, J. J. Koplin, and K. J. Allen. 2013. The natural
history of IgE-mediated food allergy: Can skin prick tests and serum-specific IgE predict
the resolution of food allergy? Int J Environ Res Public Health 10(10):5039-5061.
Peters, R. L., S. C. Dharmage, L. C. Gurrin, J. J. Koplin, A. L. Ponsonby, A. J. Lowe, M. L.
Tang, D. Tey, M. Robinson, D. Hill, H. Czech, L. Thiele, N. J. Osborne, and K. J. Allen.
2014. The natural history and clinical predictors of egg allergy in the first 2 years of life:
A prospective, population-based cohort study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(2):485-491.
Peters, R. L., K. J. Allen, S. C. Dharmage, J. J. Koplin, T. Dang, K. P. Tilbrook, A. Lowe, M. L.
Tang, L., C. Gurrin, and HealthNuts Study. 2015. Natural history of peanut allergy and
predictors of resolution in the first 4 years of life: A population-based assessment. J Al­
lergy Clin Immunol 135(5):1257-1266.
Pongracic, J. A., S. A. Bock, and S. H. Sicherer. 2012. Oral food challenge practices among al­
lergists in the United States. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 129(2):564-566.
Pucar, F., R. Kagan, H. Lim, and A. E. Clarke. 2001. Peanut challenge: A retrospective study
of 140 patients. Clin Exp Allergy 31(1):40-46.
Rodriguez, J., J. F. Crespo, W. Burks, C. Rivas-Plata, S. Fernandez-Anaya, R. Vives, and P. Da­
roca. 2000. Randomized, double-blind, crossover challenge study in 53 subjects reporting
adverse reactions to melon (Cucumis melo). J Allergy Clin Immunol 106(5):968-972.
Rodriguez-Sanchez, J., E. Gomez Torrijos, B. Lopez Viedma, E. de la Santa Belda, F. Martin
Davila, C. Garcia Rodriguez, F. Feo Brito, J. Olmedo Camacho, P. Reales Figueroa, and
J. Molina-Infante. 2014. Efficacy of IgE-targeted vs empiric six-food elimination diets
for adult eosinophilic oesophagitis. Allergy 69(7):936-942.

134

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Roehr, C. C., S. Reibel, M. Ziegert, C. Sommerfeld, U. Wahn, and B. Niggemann. 2001.
Atopy patch tests, together with determination of specific IgE levels, reduce the need
for oral food challenges in children with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
107(3):548-553.
Rolinck-Werninghaus, C., B. Niggemann, L. Grabenhenrich, U. Wahn, and K. Beyer. 2012.
Outcome of oral food challenges in children in relation to symptom-eliciting allergen dose
and allergen-specific IgE. Allergy 67(7):951-957.
Romano, A., M. Di Fonso, F. Giuffreda, G. Papa, M. C. Artesani, M. Viola, A. Venuti, V.
Palmieri, and P. Zeppilli. 2001. Food dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis: Clinical
and laboratory findings in 54 subjects. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 125(3):264-272.
Romano, A., E. Scala, G. Rumi, F. Gaeta, C. Caruso, C. Alonzi, M. Maggioletti, R. Ferrara,
P. Palazzo, V. Palmieri, P. Zeppilli, and A. Mari. 2012. Lipid transfer proteins: The most
frequent sensitizer in Italian subjects with food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis.
Clin Exp Allergy 42(11):1643-1653.
Rona, R. J., T. Keil, C. Summers, D. Gislason, L. Zuidmeer, E. Sodergren, S. T. Sigurdardottir,
T. Lindner, K. Goldhahn, J. Dahlstrom, D. McBride, and C. Madsen. 2007. The preva­
lence of food allergy: A meta-analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(3):638-646.
Ruffner, M. A., K. Ruymann, S. Barni, A. Cianferoni, T. Brown-Whitehorn, and J. M. Spergel.
2013. Food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome: Insights from review of a large refer­
ral population. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(4):343-349.
Saarinen, K. M., H. Suomalainen, and E. Savilahti. 2001. Diagnostic value of skin-prick and
patch tests and serum eosinophil cationic protein and cow’s milk-specific IgE in infants
with cow’s milk allergy. Clin Exp Allergy 31(3):423-429.
Sampson, H. A., R. Gerth van Wijk, C. Bindslev-Jensen, S. Sicherer, S. S. Teuber, A. W. Burks,
A. E. Dubois, K. Beyer, P. A. Eigenmann, J. M. Spergel, T. Werfel, and V. M. Chinchilli.
2012. Standardizing double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenges: American
Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology-European Academy of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology PRACTALL consensus report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 130(6):1260-1274.
Sampson, H. A., S. Aceves, S. A. Bock, J. James, S. Jones, D. Lang, K. Nadeau, A. NowakWegrzyn, J. Oppenheimer, T. T. Perry, C. Randolph, S. H. Sicherer, R. A. Simon, B. P.
Vickery, and R. Wood. 2014. Food allergy: A practice parameter update—2014. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 134(5):1016-1025.
Sancho, A. I., R. Foxall, T. Browne, R. Dey, L. Zuidmeer, G. Marzban, K. W. Waldron, R.
van Ree, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, M. Laimer, and E. N. Mills. 2006. Effect of
postharvest storage on the expression of the apple allergen Mal d 1. J Agric Food Chem
54(16):5917-5923.
Santos, A. F., A. Douiri, N. Becares, S. Y. Wu, A. Stephens, S. Radulovic, S. M. Chan, A. T.
Fox, G. Du Toit, V. Turcanu, and G. Lack. 2014. Basophil activation test discriminates
between allergy and tolerance in peanut-sensitized children. J Allergy Clin Immunol
134(3):645-652.
Santos, A. F., G. Du Toit, A. Douiri, S. Radulovic, A. Stephens, V. Turcanu, and G. Lack. 2015.
Distinct parameters of the basophil activation test reflect the severity and threshold of
allergic reactions to peanut. J Allergy Clin Immunol 135(1):179-186.
Savage, J. H., E. C. Matsui, J. M. Skripak, and R. A. Wood. 2007. The natural history of egg
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(6):1413-1417.
Savage, J. H., A. J. Kaeding, E. C. Matsui, and R. A. Wood. 2010. The natural history of soy
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 125(3):683-686.
Savage, J., S. Sicherer, and R. Wood. 2016. The natural history of food allergy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 4(2):196-203.

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

135

Savilahti, E. M., M. Viljanen, M. Kuitunen, and E. Savilahti. 2012. Cow’s milk and ovalbumin­
specific IgG and IgA in children with eczema: Low beta-lactoglobulin-specific IgG4 levels
are associated with cow’s milk allergy. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 23(6):590-596.
Savilahti, E. M., M. Kuitunen, E. Savilahti, and M. J. Makela. 2014. Specific antibodies in
oral immunotherapy for cow’s milk allergy: Kinetics and prediction of clinical outcome.
Int Arch Allergy Immunol 164(1):32-39.
Savvatianos, S., A. P. Konstantinopoulos, A. Borga, G. Stavroulakis, J. Lidholm, M. P. Borres,
E. Manousakis, and N. G. Papadopoulos. 2015. Sensitization to cashew nut 2S albumin,
Ana o 3, is highly predictive of cashew and pistachio allergy in Greek children. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 136(1):192-194.
Shek, L. P., L. Soderstrom, S. Ahlstedt, K. Beyer, and H. A. Sampson. 2004. Determination of
food specific IgE levels over time can predict the development of tolerance in cow’s milk
and hen’s egg allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 114(2):387-391.
Shreffler, W. G., K. Beyer, T. H. Chu, A. W. Burks, and H. A. Sampson. 2004. Microarray
immunoassay: Association of clinical history, in vitro IgE function, and heterogeneity of
allergenic peanut epitopes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 113(4):776-782.
Sicherer, S. H. 2001. Clinical implications of cross-reactive food allergens. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 108(6):881-890.
Sicherer, S. H. 2002. Food allergy. Lancet 360(9334):701-710.
Sicherer, S. H., and R. A. Wood. 2012. Allergy testing in childhood: Using allergen-specific
IgE tests. Pediatrics 129(1):193-197.
Sicherer, S. H., P. A. Vargas, M. E. Groetch, L. Christie, S. K. Carlisle, S. Noone, and S. M.
Jones. 2012. Development and validation of educational materials for food allergy. J
Pediatr 160(4):651-656.
Sicherer, S. H., R. A. Wood, B. P. Vickery, S. M. Jones, A. H. Liu, D. M. Fleischer, P. Dawson,
L. Mayer, A. W. Burks, A. Grishin, D. Stablein, and H. A. Sampson. 2014. The natural
history of egg allergy in an observational cohort. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(2):492-499.
Sidbury, R., W. L. Tom, J. N. Bergman, K. D. Cooper, R. A. Silverman, T. G. Berger, S. L.
Chamlin, D. E. Cohen, K. M. Cordoro, D. M. Davis, S. R. Feldman, J. M. Hanifin, A.
Krol, D. J. Margolis, A. S. Paller, K. Schwarzenberger, E. L. Simpson, H. C. Williams,
C. A. Elmets, J. Block, C. G. Harrod, W. Smith Begolka, and L. F. Eichenfield. 2014.
Guidelines of care for the management of atopic dermatitis: Section 4. Prevention of
disease flares and use of adjunctive therapies and approaches. J Am Acad Dermatol
71(6):1218-1233.
Skripak, J. M., E. C. Matsui, K. Mudd, and R. A. Wood. 2007. The natural history of IgE­
mediated cow’s milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(5): 1172-1177.
Skypala, I. J., C. Venter, R. Meyer, N. W. deJong, A. T. Fox, M. Groetch, J. N. Oude Elberink,
A. Sprikkelman, L. Diamandi, and B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra. 2015. The development of a stan­
dardised diet history tool to support the diagnosis of food allergy. Clin Transl Allergy 5:7.
Soares-Weiser, K., Y. Takwoingi, S. S. Panesar, A. Muraro, T. Werfel, K. HoffmannSommergruber, G. Roberts, S. Halken, L. Poulsen, R. van Ree, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, and
A. Sheikh. 2014. The diagnosis of food allergy: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Allergy 69(1):76-86.
Song, Y., J. Wang, N. Leung, L. X. Wang, L. Lisann, S. H. Sicherer, A. M. Scurlock, R. Pesek,
T. T. Perry, S. M. Jones, and X. M. Li. 2015. Correlations between basophil activation,
allergen-specific IgE with outcome and severity of oral food challenges. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 114(4):319-326.
Spergel, J. M., T. F. Brown-Whitehorn, A. Cianferoni, M. Shuker, M. L. Wang, R. Verma, and
C. A. Liacouras. 2012. Identification of causative foods in children with eosinophilic
esophagitis treated with an elimination diet. J Allergy Clin Immunol 130(2):461-467.

136

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Sporik, R., D. J. Hill, and C. S. Hosking. 2000. Specificity of allergen skin testing in predict­
ing positive open food challenges to milk, egg and peanut in children. Clin Exp Allergy
30(11):1540-1546.
Stapel, S. O., R. Asero, B. K. Ballmer-Weber, E. F. Knol, S. Strobel, S. Vieths, and J. KleineTebbe. 2008. Testing for IgG4 against foods is not recommended as a diagnostic tool:
EAACI task force report. Allergy 63(7):793-796.
Summers, C. W., R. S. Pumphrey, C. N. Woods, G. McDowell, P. W. Pemberton, and P. D.
Arkwright. 2008. Factors predicting anaphylaxis to peanuts and tree nuts in patients
referred to a specialist center. J Allergy Clin Immunol 121(3):632-638.
Sverremark-Ekström, E., E. H. Hultgren, M. P. Borres, and C. Nilsson. 2012. Peanut sensitiza­
tion during the first 5 yr of life is associated with elevated levels of peanut-specific IgG.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 23(3):224-229.
Syed, A., M. A. Garcia, S. C. Lyu, R. Bucayu, A. Kohli, S. Ishida, J. P. Berglund, M. Tsai, H.
Maecker, G. O’Riordan, S. J. Galli, and K. C. Nadeau. 2014. Peanut oral immunotherapy
results in increased antigen-induced regulatory T-cell function and hypomethylation of
forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3). J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(2):500-510.
Ta, V., B. Weldon, G. Yu, O. Humblet, S. Neale-May, and K. Nadeau. 2011. Use of spe­
cific IgE and skin prick test to determine clinical reaction severity. Br J Med Med Res
1(4):410-429.
Ta, V., D. R. Scott, W. K. Chin, N. E. Wineinger, J. M. Kelso, and A. A. White. 2015. Dif­
ferential skin test reactivity to pollens in pollen food allergy syndrome versus allergic
rhinitis. Allergy Asthma Proc 36(5):379-385.
Thyagarajan, A., S. M. Jones, A. Calatroni, L. Pons, M. Kulis, C. S. Woo, M. Kamalakannan,
B. P. Vickery, A. M. Scurlock, A. Wesley Burks, and W. G. Shreffler. 2012. Evidence of
pathway-specific basophil anergy induced by peanut oral immunotherapy in peanutallergic children. Clin Exp Allergy 42(8):1197-1205.
Tolkki, L., K. Alanko, L. Petman, M. B. Skydtsgaard, P. G. Milvang, U. Seppala, and A. Ranki.
2013. Clinical characterization and IgE profiling of birch (Betula verrucosa)—allergic
individuals suffering from allergic reactions to raw fruits and vegetables. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 1(6):623-631.
Tomicic, S., G. Norrman, K. Falth-Magnusson, M. C. Jenmalm, I. Devenney, and M. F.
Bottcher. 2009. High levels of IgG4 antibodies to foods during infancy are associated
with tolerance to corresponding foods later in life. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 20(1):35-41.
Turner, P. J., J. L. Baumert, K. Beyer, R. J. Boyle, C. H. Chan, A. T. Clark, R. W. Crevel, A.
DunnGalvin, M. Fernandez-Rivas, M. H. Gowland, L. Grabenhenrich, S. Hardy, G. F.
Houben, J. O’B Hourihane, A. Muraro, L. K. Poulsen, K. Pyrz, B. C. Remington, S.
Schnadt, R. van Ree, C. Venter, M. Worm, E. N. Mills, G. Roberts, and B. K. BallmerWeber. 2016. Can we identify patients at risk of life-threatening allergic reactions to
food? Allergy 71(9):1241-1255.
Urisu, A., M. Ebisawa, K. Ito, Y. Aihara, S. Ito, M. Mayumi, Y. Kohno, and N. Kondo. 2014.
Japanese Guideline for Food Allergy 2014. Allergol Int 63(3):399-419.
Vadas, P., M. Gold, B. Perelman, G. M. Liss, G. Lack, T. Blyth, F. E. Simons, K. J. Simons,
D. Cass, and J. Yeung. 2008. Platelet-activating factor, PAF acetylhydrolase, and severe
anaphylaxis. N Engl J Med 358(1):28-35.
van der Zee, T., A. Dubois, M. Kerkhof, S. van der Heide, and B. Vlieg-Boerstra. 2011. The
eliciting dose of peanut in double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenges decreases
with increasing age and specific IgE level in children and young adults. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 128(5):1031-1036.
van Erp, F. C., J. Boot, A. C. Knulst, S. G. Pasmans, C. K. van der Ent, and Y. Meijer. 2014.
Reintroduction failure after negative peanut challenges in children. Pediatr Allergy Im­
munol 25(6):580-585.

ASSESSMENTS, DIAGNOSTIC TESTING, DISEASE MONITORING

137

Van Winkle, R. C., and C. Chang. 2014. The biochemical basis and clinical evidence of food
allergy due to lipid transfer proteins: A comprehensive review. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
46(3):211-224.
Varshney, P., S. M. Jones, A. M. Scurlock, T. T. Perry, A. Kemper, P. Steele, A. Hiegel, J.
Kamilaris, S. Carlisle, X. Yue, M. Kulis, L. Pons, B. Vickery, and A. W. Burks. 2011. A
randomized controlled study of peanut oral immunotherapy: Clinical desensitization and
modulation of the allergic response. J Allergy Clin Immunol 127(3):654-660.
Venter, C., T. Brown, N. Shah, J. Walsh, and A. T. Fox. 2013. Diagnosis and management
of non-IgE-mediated cow’s milk allergy in infancy—A UK primary care practical guide.
Clin Transl Allergy 3(1):23.
Verstege, A., A. Mehl, C. Rolinck-Werninghaus, U. Staden, M. Nocon, K. Beyer, and B.
Niggemann. 2005. The predictive value of the skin prick test wheal size for the outcome
of oral food challenges. Clin Exp Allergy 35(9):1220-1226.
Vickery, B. P., J. Lin, M. Kulis, Z. Fu, P. H. Steele, S. M. Jones, A. M. Scurlock, G. Gimenez,
L. Bardina, H. A. Sampson, and A. W. Burks. 2013. Peanut oral immunotherapy
modifies IgE and IgG4 responses to major peanut allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol
131(1):128-134.
Vickery, B. P., A. M. Scurlock, M. Kulis, P. H. Steele, J. Kamilaris, J. P. Berglund, C. Burk, A.
Hiegel, S. Carlisle, L. Christie, T. T. Perry, R. D. Pesek, S. Sheikh, Y. Virkud, P. B. Smith,
M. H. Shamji, S. R. Durham, S. M. Jones, and A. W. Burks. 2014. Sustained unrespon­
siveness to peanut in subjects who have completed peanut oral immunotherapy. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 133(2):468-475.
Vieira, T., L. Cunha, E. Neves, and H. Falcao. 2014. Diagnostic usefulness of component-re­
solved diagnosis by skin prick tests and specific IgE to single allergen components in chil­
dren with allergy to fruits and vegetables. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 42(2):127-135.
Vlieg-Boerstra, B. J., W. E. van de Weg, S. van der Heide, and A. E. Dubois. 2013. Where to
prick the apple for skin testing? Allergy 68(9):1196-1198.
Wainstein, B. K., J. Studdert, M. Ziegler, and J. B. Ziegler. 2010. Prediction of anaphylaxis
during peanut food challenge: Usefulness of the peanut skin prick test (SPT) and specific
IgE level. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 21(4 Pt 1):603-611.
Wang, J., J. H. Godbold, and H. A. Sampson. 2008. Correlation of serum allergy (IgE) tests
performed by different assay systems. J Allergy Clin Immunol 121(5):1219-1224.
Wang, J., J. Lin, L. Bardina, M. Goldis, A. Nowak-Wegrzyn, W. G. Shreffler, and H. A.
Sampson. 2010. Correlation of IgE/IgG4 milk epitopes and affinity of milk-specific IgE
antibodies with different phenotypes of clinical milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
125(3):695-702.
Wood, R. A., S. H. Sicherer, B. P. Vickery, S. M. Jones, A. H. Liu, D. M. Fleischer, A. K.
Henning, L. Mayer, A. W. Burks, A. Grishin, D. Stablein, and H. A. Sampson. 2013.
The natural history of milk allergy in an observational cohort. J Allergy Clin Immunol
131(3):805-812.
Yang, H., Y. Z. Xiao, X. Y. Luo, Q. Tan, and H. Wang. 2014. Diagnostic accuracy of atopy
patch tests for food allergy in children with atopic dermatitis aged less than two years.
Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 42(1):22-28.
Zuidmeer, L., and R. van Ree. 2007. Lipid transfer protein allergy: Primary food allergy or
pollen/food syndrome in some cases. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 7(3):269-273.

5
Potential Genetic and Environmental
Determinants of Food Allergy Risk
and Possible Prevention Strategies

The increase in food allergy has captured the attention of the medical
and research communities and the general public. Although the extent of the
increase and the most affected countries are not accurately known, there is
little doubt that immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated food allergy and anaphy­
laxis were rarely reported 50 years ago but are now commonly described
(see Chapter 3). The prevalence of allergenic reactions to foods might differ
by region of the world in part because of differences in exposures to specific
foods. However, the drivers for this modern day epidemic in food allergy are
poorly understood. It is not clear whether this phenomenon is part of the
global rise in all allergic diseases at the end of the 20th century, or is due to
a new set of unique factors, or to a combination of both.
Like other complex diseases, food allergy is thought to be caused by a
combination of genetic and environmental factors. This chapter describes
the state of the scientific evidence related to what are currently thought to be
the most relevant genetic and environmental risk factors as well as genomeenvironment (GxE) interactions. The chapter starts with a discussion of the
application of the developmental/ecological model (see Chapter 1) to food
allergy risk factors. To that effect, a brief summary of the parallel develop­
ment of the immune system of the child is included. The concept of atopic
march1 is briefly introduced as potentially important when considering pre­
vention strategies. Although other immune-related diseases, such as eczema
1 The atopic march refers to the idea that atopic disorders progress over time from eczema
(i.e., atopic dermatitis) to asthma (see Box 5-2 and Figure 5-1).

139

140

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

(also known as “atopic dermatitis”), are often components of the atopic
march that includes food allergy, not all people with eczema develop food
allergy. Consequently, preventing eczema might not always decrease the risk
of developing food allergy. Therefore, the committee decided to focus only
on the relevant literature directly linked to the development of food allergy
and findings associated with eczema alone are not included in this report.
Also, the chapter concentrates on food allergy as an outcome except for
a few risk determinants for which there are no data on food allergies. In
these cases, the committee explored food sensitization2 as a potential sur­
rogate outcome. Although food sensitization is on the causal pathway for
IgE-mediated food allergy, care should be taken in interpreting these results
because food sensitization may be a nonspecific marker predisposition to
atopy in general, not to food allergy in particular.
To provide context for the current scientific evidence on risk deter­
minants, the methodological limitations of studies to date are explained.
The pre- and postnatal environmental risk factors that might explain the
development of food allergies have been grouped into emerging hypotheses:
(1) microbial hypotheses (hygiene and old friends); (2) allergen avoidance
hypothesis; (3) dual allergen exposure hypothesis; (4) nutritional immuno­
modulation hypothesis; and (5) other hypotheses. Each section on a specific
determinant factor ends with a conclusion statement about the evidence
supporting the link between exposure to the considered determinant and
food allergies. At the end of the chapter, the committee provides their over­
all conclusions, recommendations, and research needs about strategies for
preventing food allergies.
FINDING PREVENTIVE MEASURES:
A DEVELOPMENTAL/ECOLOGICAL APPROACH
As described in Chapter 1, the committee approached its task from a
developmental/ecological perspective. From the developmental perspective,
the committee emphasizes the importance of developmental timing for
exposures and for safety. In considering the risk determinants for devel­
oping food allergies, the committee focused on the different developmen­
tal periods—prenatal, early childhood, primary school-age, adolescence,
adulthood, and elder years. In the prenatal period and first year of life, a
fetus and infant’s gut goes through substantial microbiome and immune
developmental changes (see Box 5-1). This key period presents a window of
opportunity to modify health outcomes at a time when infants are ready to
2 Sensitization is a condition where an individual produces detectable immunoglobulin E
(IgE) to a particular allergen. It can precede a food allergy reaction, but not all individuals
with detectable IgE to a food allergen will experience a food allergy reaction.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

BOX 5-1
Highlights of Early Development: The Microbiome, the
Immune System, and the Gastrointestinal Barrier
Humans acquire their genes from their parents and when infants are born,
they acquire their microbiome primarily from their mothers but also from medical
staff, family members, and others. After birth, microbes colonize every epithelial
surface of the baby and the microbiome matures until adulthood. The gut has specific receptors that are required to be present in order for microbes to be able to
colonize the human host and in that way the microbiome and the immune system
co-develop; some microbes play a critical role in maturation of the immune system as they induce pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory responses to maintain
homeostasis of the immune system.
Although the immune system begins to develop through transfer of maternal
immunoglobulins across the placenta, data suggest that immune dysregulation
can occur at birth (Zhang et al., 2016) and that immune responsiveness can be
detected as early as 22 weeks of gestation (Jones et al., 1996; Prescott et al.,
1998). Another method of transfer of bioactive compounds from the mother to
the child is through consumption of breast milk. A multitude of hormones, growth
factors, neuropeptides, and anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory agents can
influence gut colonization by microorganisms (Goldman, 2000). At the same time,
the microbiome produces signaling molecules that interact with the host. The baby
also produces antibodies.
Infant feeding practices (i.e., use of formula versus breast milk) influence
the succession of microbiota colonization (Adlerberth and Wold, 2009). During
their first year, infants transition to solid food, which happens concurrently with a
number of factors, such as an increasing ability to chew. Over the same period,
oral immune tolerance (a state of systemic immune unresponsiveness to ingested
allergens) ordinarily is acquired (Pabst and Mowat, 2012). A substantial increase
in oral immune tolerance to food has been hypothesized to occur at the time
of weaning (Prescott et al., 2008), possibly in relation to changes in microbial
constitution and developmental maturation of the mucosal immune system (i.e.,
gut-associated lymphoid tissues, or GALTs).
The largest interface between the environment and the individual is the
intestinal epithelium. Molecules can either be absorbed or secreted through this
barrier. In a healthy state, it is necessary for the host to develop immune homeostasis in order to balance the need to respond to pathogens while maintaining
suppressed responses against commensal microbial antigens and food antigens.
For example, the epithelium and dendritic cells in the GALT have receptors that
recognize specific molecular patterns on pathogens. Also, tight junctions between
cells lining the small intestine appear to play a significant role in regulating epithelial permeability and are dynamic, in that they are able to adapt to a variety
of developmental, physiological, and pathological circumstances. This is likely
controlled through the first year of life in response to dietary and developmental
changes (Fasano, 2000) and also is facilitated by the commensal intestinal microbiota, which is essential for the normal development of the GALT and maintenance
of immune homeostasis (Hansen et al., 2012; Sudo et al., 1997).

141

142

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

begin eating solid foods. Due to the importance of this period in establish­
ing the onset of food allergies, the scientific literature on food allergy risk
factors has focused more on these early life stages and less on those changes
that may occur in older children, adolescents, or adults. Therefore, while
the committee’s conclusions and recommendations were crafted through
a developmental lens, they are limited by the preponderance of scientific
literature on these early ages.
Food Allergies and the Atopic March
Within the developmental perspective, the committee considered the
concept of the atopic march (see Box 5-2) in their deliberations. The atopic
march refers to the idea that atopic disorders progress over time from
eczema to asthma (see Figure 5-1). In fact, in some publications, eczema is
viewed as a proxy for food allergies because eczema frequently precedes the
development of food allergies. In fact, eczema and food allergies are distinct
conditions with different etiologies and it is not appropriate to assume that
eczema is a surrogate for food allergy. Although the concept of the atopic
march is generally accepted, the interplay of the various related immune
conditions is still being studied and, therefore, it would be premature to
adopt the general idea that strategies to prevent atopic disorders that typi­
cally occur earlier in a child’s development necessarily would also prevent
the onset of food allergy. Additional prospective cohort studies with the
appropriate methodologies are needed, particularly to understand the rela­
tionship between other allergic disorders and food allergy. Thus, the com­
mittee did not include other allergic disorders (i.e., wheeze, asthma, eczema,
or allergic rhinitis) or their risk factors in their review of the evidence of
potential determinants of food allergy.
METHODOLOGICAL LIMITATIONS
Current evidence about the risk factors associated with food allergy
or sensitization is derived primarily from epidemiological (observational
or ecological) studies. In addition to potential limitations in any research
study—such as lack of generalizability, small number of samples, and
inaccurate outcomes measurements—epidemiological studies need to be
interpreted appropriately, with particular consideration to potential con­
founding factors and their careful adjustment. For instance, being at high
risk of allergic disease could be a confounder when exploring the effects
of breastfeeding in food allergies because high-risk families are more likely
to follow guidelines, which might inform them about the putative protec­
tive effects of breastfeeding. If researchers do not adjust their analysis for
family history of allergy (the main risk of allergy development), breast­

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

BOX 5-2
The Atopic March
A food allergy can coexist with a variety of other allergic conditions that share
the same signs and symptoms. A systematic review reported that in individuals
with food allergy, 35 to 71 percent also had evidence of atopic dermatitis, 33 to 40
percent also had evidence of allergic rhinitis, and 34 to 49 percent had evidence of
asthma (Boyce et al., 2010). A food allergy also can be part of the temporal pattern
in which an individual develops multiple allergic disorders. This pattern, called the
atopic march, describes a process in which atopic disorders progress over time
from eczema (i.e., atopic dermatitis) to asthma (see Figure 5-1).
In the context of risk determinants and prevention strategies, understanding
the mechanisms that underlie the atopic march from infancy to adulthood (including whether the allergic disorders have a cause-and-effect relationship or simply
share similar environmental and genetic causes) would be important when considering prevention options or when identifying individuals at risk. For example, if
eczema early in life (age 0 to 12 months) is a risk factor for developing peanut and
milk allergy as a child, health care providers might consider this when designing
effective prevention strategies.
One hypothesis that might explain the atopic march is the dual allergen exposure hypothesis. This hypothesis identifies the epithelium of the skin, airways,
and digestive system as the primary location where both allergic sensitization and
(later) allergic reactions are initiated. The hypothesis proposes that genetically determined or environmentally induced abnormalities affecting the epithelium could
be a common factor in the development of allergic diseases. For example, certain
mutations in the gene that codes for filaggrin, a protein essential in maintaining
epidermal homeostasis in the skin, result in an impairment of epidermal barrier
function that predisposes to allergic diseases not only in the skin (i.e., atopic
dermatitis) but also to allergies affecting other anatomical sites, namely, allergic
rhinitis, atopic asthma, food sensitization, and possibly food allergy.
Although the concept of atopic march is widely accepted, the questions about
the nature of the relationships continue to be the subject of many investigations
and much debate. For example, the authors of a systematic review on the causal
relationship between eczema and subsequent allergic disorders concluded that
atopic dermatitis might contribute to the development of allergic rhinitis. However,
they could not reach a similar conclusion for the relationship between atopic
dermatitis and food allergies (Dharmage et al., 2014). Also, a recent review of
systematic reviews of birth cohort studies was not conclusive on whether early
life food sensitization leads to eczema and other allergic disorders (i.e., wheeze,
asthma, or allergic rhinitis) (Alduraywish et al., 2016). In the opinion of the authors
of that report, the main reason for this was the lack of studies in which confounding factors (early life eczema and wheeze) had been considered.

143

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Percent

144

Age of Onset
Atopic Dermatitis
Gastrointestinal Food Allergy
Allergic Rhinitis

Food Allergy
Asthma

FIGURE 5-1 Typical temporal progression of allergic diseases. The graph does not
include specific ages or percents on the x- and y-axis because it was not constructed
from empirical data on the progression of immune-related diseases but from the
concept of the atopic march, which needs to be studied further.

feeding can be misinterpreted as increasing the risk of allergic disease.
This phenomenon is called “reverse causation” and is one of the reasons
why randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are required to provide strong
evidence that a factor is indeed causally related. Even with the best inten­
tions, observational studies can be undermined by unmeasured confounders
(i.e., residual confounding). High-quality data demonstrating causation
should exist before recommendations are incorporated into public health
guidelines. In most cases, this would mean RCTs. However, when evidence
is not strong or trials are ethically difficult to mount (such as is the case
for breastfeeding where randomization to a nonbreastfeeding arm would
be unethical), clinicians need to interpret emerging or less robust evidence
and provide carefully framed information to individual patients and their
families to inform health decisions.
Until recently, food allergy has been less common than other allergic
diseases. Therefore earlier allergy studies generally did not focus on food
allergy as an outcome. It is only recently, as food allergy prevalence has
increased, that attempts have been made to more precisely define and mea­
sure food allergy. Measurement methods have evolved from often inaccurate

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

145

self- or parent-reported data to better methods, such as the results of oral
food challenges (OFCs). Recent literature, particularly after 2010, has more
consistently reported food allergy outcomes using what is now regarded
as the gold standard measurement—double-blind, placebo-controlled oral
food challenge (DBPCOFC), in which the food is disguised so that neither
parent nor health care professional knows whether the food or a placebo is
being offered. Some experts have recommended that for children younger
than 2 years, open OFC, in which foods in their natural state are offered
(versus DBPCOFC) also can be included in the definition of gold standard
because, in this age group, subjective symptoms do not complicate medical
history and objective signs can be reliably used as endpoints.
Even DBPCOFC are limited by methodologic differences among stud­
ies (see Chapter 4). In addition, criteria for defining a positive oral chal­
lenge (i.e., a food allergic reaction) have not been formalized until recently
(Koplin et al., 2012b; Sampson et al., 2012; see Chapter 4). Although most
protocols state that a positive challenge is evidenced by an immediate reac­
tion consistent with IgE-mediated food allergy, such as urticaria (hives),
angioedema, or anaphylaxis, interpretation of more subjective symptoms,
such as abdominal pain or nausea, or the more ubiquitous and less clearly
defined sign of an eczema flare, remains difficult. Differences in criteria for
defining a positive OFC across different studies and research centers hinders
the ability to compare food allergy prevalence estimates among studies, to
identify risk factors (because phenotypes might vary across different study
cohorts), and to assess the success of different treatment strategies (includ­
ing oral immunotherapy).
It should be noted, however, that performing large-scale OFCs is not
always possible because of issues with compliance, risk to participants, and
cost. As stated in Chapter 2, many population-based studies have relied
on the detection of food-specific serum IgE (sIgE) antibodies as an indirect
marker of food allergy, either alone or in conjunction with reported symp­
toms on ingestion of the food. These studies do provide insights into the
temporal trend changes in food allergy prevalence, but should be viewed
with caution when assessing risk factors for predicting food allergy owing
to the high false positive rate and low specificity of this method. Selfreported measures tend to overreport food allergy due to the inability of
individuals to distinguish between symptoms of food intolerance and food
allergy. It is also not possible to employ reports from parents to determine
allergic status to foods that have not yet been introduced into an infant’s
diet (see Chapters 3 and 4).
These methodological limitations, and specifically the outcome used to
define the food allergy, and their implications for the interpretation of the
studies reviewed herein, are noted in conjunction with the specific studies
described in this chapter.

146

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

APPROACH TO LITERATURE REVIEW
Literature Search Strategy and Study Selection
Electronic literature searches of published systematic reviews (from
2010 to September 2015) and primary studies (from 2012 to September
2015) indexed in Medline, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
EMBASE, and ISI Web of Science were conducted. The complete literature
search and screening strategies, study selection flow, and study eligibility
criteria are described in Appendix C. The committee based its literature
search strategies on the systematic reviews by Marrs et al. and de Silva et
al. and on selected individual papers published after those reviews (2012
and beyond) to develop its conclusions (de Silva et al., 2014; Marrs et al.,
2013). Where appropriate, other systematic reviews also were considered.
Summary tables for all systematic reviews and studies conducted after
2012 are included in Appendix C. Ongoing trials of risk determinants of
food allergy for which results were not available at the time of this publi­
cation are summarized in Table 5-1. Selected public health guidelines from
various countries are listed in Table 5-2.
Grading the Evidence
For each factor described, the committee made a final conclusion state­
ment considering the preponderance of the evidence collected, as described
above. The committee used the approach taken by the 2015 Dietary Guide­
lines Advisory Committee to grade as strong, moderate, limited, or no grade
(DGAC, 2015) (see Table 5-3).
GENETIC AND EPIGENETIC RISK FACTORS
The rise in the prevalence of allergic diseases has occurred more rap­
idly than can be accounted for by changes in genetic sequence (Tan et al.,
2012b). Therefore, similar to other complex diseases, the rising preva­
lence of allergic diseases is likely due to environmental factors (i.e., the
exposome).3 In this way, the rise may be primarily occurring in those who
are both genetically predisposed and exposed to the allergenic environment,
as well as in those at risk through a heritable epigenetic mechanism from
events that occurred when the parents of current children were in utero.
Environmental exposures, including lifestyle and diet, interact4 with genetic
3 The exposome refers to all life course environmental exposures (including factors related
to lifestyle, such as smoking or diet) from the prenatal period onward.
4 An interaction is indicated when the simultaneous influence of two or more factors on a
phenotype is not additive.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

147

predisposition to modify the risk of disease. For example, the influence of
the C-159 T polymorphism on the cluster of differentiation 14 (CD14) gene
may be dependent on microbial stimulation from the environment (Lau
et al., 2014), with individuals who carry the TT genotype demonstrating
increased protection from eczema with exposure to dogs (Myers et al.,
2010).
The concept of the epigenome,5 which regulates gene expression and
is largely established in utero, is relevant to early life origins of allergic
disease. In contrast to deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences, which are
relatively stable, the epigenome can be altered throughout the lifespan, but
is particularly sensitive to environmental factors during early life periods
(see Figure 5-2). Environmental factors that have often been considered in
interaction with genetic risk factors include vitamin D (Koplin et al., 2016;
Liu et al., 2011), smoking, air pollution, and microbial exposures (Tan et
al., 2012b). Epigenetic considerations for other environmental factors, for
which there is evidence of involvement in allergic diseases, have not yet
been considered. It also would be useful to consider putative causative
factors for food allergy, such as diet and food supplements, in relation to
well-known genetic risks, such as filaggrin mutations.
A further consideration is the fact that these environmental risk fac­
tors may operate differentially based on the underlying risk category of
the individual (i.e., genetic risk or family history, the more traditional
form of risk stratification). As discussed below, evidence already exists of
different responses to some environmental factors (e.g., vitamin D) based
on a genetic risk factor (vitamin D receptor binding protein) (Koplin et
al., 2016). In addition to biological variations, risk factors also may affect
behavioral patterns, as has been described by Tey et al. (2014). The authors
found that those with a family history of allergy were less likely to respond
appropriately to guidelines revisions to introduce allergenic solids earlier in
the diet of an infant. Future clinical practice guidelines and public health
policy may need to take into account the way that a risk factor may dif­
ferentially affect not only risk of disease, but also the behavior of the indi­
vidual with a food allergy and/or their caregivers.
This section describes studies on the genetic and epigenetic factors that
might affect food allergy outcomes.

5 Epigenome refers to the chemical changes to the deoxyribonucleic acid and histone pro­
teins (e.g., methylation) of an organism that occur through life and can result in changes to
the structure of chromatin and to the function of the genome. These changes can be inherited
through transgenerational epigenetic inheritance.

Study Design,
Country

RCT, Australia

Observational,
US

RCT, UK

RCT, Australia

Study

BEAT (Beating
Egg Allergy)

CoFAR2

EAT (Enquiring
about
Tolerance)

STEP (Starting
Time for Egg
Protein)

N

Infants 4-6 mo
without eczema
but atopic
mothers

Infants 3 mo

1,500

1,306

Children with
515
egg and/or milk
allergy, 3-15 mo

Infants with
high risk of
atopy, 4-6 mo

Population

3 years

After 3 years
of age

8 and 12 mo

Age When
Outcome Is
Ascertained

Peanut allergy

Egg allergy
assessment

Food Allergy
Outcome
Deﬁnition

Egg introduction
versus placebo

Early
introduction of 6
allergenic foods
together with
breastfeeding
versus standard
introduction (6
months)

Egg introduction
versus placebo

Exposure

Does introducing
certain foods early
in a child’s diet
along with continued
breastfeeding
stop infants from
developing food
allergy?

What is the
development of
peanut allergy in
infants (3 to 15
months in age) with
known milk or egg
allergy?

What is the effect of
early introduction
of egg into the diet
of infants at high
risk of atopy and
subsequent egg
allergy?

Question to Answer

TABLE 5-1 Registered Randomized Controlled Clinical Trials and Observational Studies on Prevention

148

Germany

RCT, Norway

Observational
(case-control),
Australia

RCT, Australia

HEAP

PreventADALL
(Preventing
Atopic
Dermatitis and
Allergies in
Children)

PIFA (Pertussis
Immunisation
and Food
Allergy)

VITALITY

Infants 6-8
weeks

Children 14-18
years

Infants

Infants 4-6 mo

800

12 months

14-18 years

6, 12, 36, and
48 mo

12 mo

Challengeproven food
allergy in study
participants
with
positive SPT

History of
consistent
clinical
symptoms
following
ingestion of an
implicated food
and evidence
of sensitization
to that food
by laboratory
testing

Early food
introduction by
3-4 mo

Egg allergy
Is primary
prevention of allergic
diseases possible by
skin care and early
food introduction?

Vitamin D (400
IU/day) versus
placebo for 10
months

continued

Can vitamin D
supplementation in
infants prevent food
allergy in the ﬁrst
year of life?

Whole cell versus What is the
acellular pertussis possible food allergyvaccine
preventive beneﬁt
of using whole cell
pertussis vaccination
compared with
acelluar pertussis
vaccine for
whooping cough
vaccination in
childhood?

Food allergy to
any intervention
allergen (cow
milk, peanut,
wheat, egg)

Egg introduction
versus placebo

149

Observational,
Canada

Observational,
Ireland

Early Life
Origins of the
Food Allergy
Epidemic

The Cork
BASELINE
Birth Cohort
Study
(BASELINE)

Study

Study Design,
Country

TABLE 5-1 Continued

Infants

Peanutsensitized
children, 4-10
years

Population

N

2 years

5 years

Age When
Outcome Is
Ascertained
DBPCOFC to
peanut

Food Allergy
Outcome
Deﬁnition

Incidence and
prevalence of
food allergy

Eating versus
avoiding peanut

Exposure

What are the early
life factors, including
parental allergy,
genetic susceptibility
measured using
ﬁllagrin mutational
status, skin barrier
function, and
vitamin D status and
their effect on risk
of eczema and food
allergy in the ﬁrst 2
years of life?

Does avoidance of
peanut by children
with positive SPT to
peanut in the ﬁrst 5
years of life increase
the likelihood
of developing a
persistent peanut
allergy by age 5
years?

Question to Answer

150

Pregnant
women with at
least one parent
or a sibling
with clinical
symptoms
or history of
allergic disease
and their
newborn infants

PROOM-3

RCT, Sweden

Infants, 1-7
days old, with
intent to be
exclusively
breastfed for a
minimum of 6
months

Probiotic
RCT, US
Supplementation
in Breastfed
Newborn
Infants

6 and 12
months

First 78 weeks
of life

IgE-associated
disease
measured by
SPT (milk, egg,
wheat, peanut)

Levels of serum
FABPs and
glutathione­
S-transferase
(alpha-GST)
will be
measured as
markers of GI
permeability
and potential
food allergy;
parental report
of feeding
intolerance

Dietary
supplementation
with L. reuteri
and omega-3
PUFA during
pregnancy and
postnatally versus
placebo

Probiotic
supplementation
versus placebo

continued

Can supplementation
with Lactobacillus
reuteri and omega-3
fatty acids during
pregnancy and
lactation reduce
the risk of allergic
disease in infancy?

What is the dose of a
probiotic supplement
(Biﬁdobacterium
longum subsp.
infantis) required to
achieve predominant
gut colonization
in healthy
newborn, breastfed
infants? Does
supplementation
with this probiotic
reduce the chance of
developing eczema
and food allergies in
enrolled infants?

151

Food allergic
individuals ages
4 months to 75
years

Molecular Basis
of Food Allergy

N

Various

1 year

Age When
Outcome Is
Ascertained
SPT and
challengeproven food
allergy

Food Allergy
Outcome
Definition
BCG
immunization
for TB versus no
immunization

Exposure

What is the
molecular basis of
food allergy? What
are the genetic
factors that lead to
the development of
food allergy?

Does BCG
immunization at
birth, compared
to no BCG
immunization, lead
to a reduction in
measures of allergy
and infection in the
first 12 months of
life?

Question to Answer

NOTE: AU = Australia; DBPCOFC = double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenge; FABP = fatty acid binding protein; GI = gastrointestinal; IgE = immunoglobulin E; sIgE = food-specific serum IgE; SPT = skin prick test; TB = tuberculosis; UK = United Kingdom; US = United States.

Observational,
US

Infants, younger
than 10 days
old

Population

Mis-BAIR
RCT, Australia
(Melbourne
Infant StudyBCG for Allergy
and Infection
Reduction)

Study

Study Design,
Country

TABLE 5-1 Continued

152

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

153

Genetics
The role of genetics in food allergies was initially supported by its
familial aggregation (Tsai et al., 2009) and heritability estimates derived
from twin studies (Liu et al., 2009; Sicherer et al., 2000). Later, the ability
to explore the genome opened the possibility to examine the involvement
of specific candidate genes. More recently the potential for discovery of
new loci has expanded with the use of genome-wide association studies
(GWASs)6 (Hong et al., 2015). However, unlike other diseases and pheno­
types, for which hundreds of loci have been identified, the number of loci
that have been tentatively associated with food allergies is still rather small.
As expected, most of these candidate genes encode products influenc­
ing immune mechanisms, including antigen presentation or a shift of the
immune system toward a Th2 response. The hypothesis is that genetic
predispositions may result in dysregulation of the immune system and, in
the context of specific environmental factors, lead to food allergy. However,
the association studies performed to date that have aimed to uncover the
genetic architecture of food allergies have faced similar challenges as for
other complex human diseases to date. Specifically, the identified loci can
explain only a very small fraction of the phenotypic variance and few of
the loci examined have provided conclusive and consistent findings across
populations (see Table 5-4).
Only one GWAS has been reported in relation to food allergies (peanut,
milk, and egg) (Hong et al., 2015). Two single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) showed an association with peanut allergy that was above the
GWAS threshold for significance, both of them in the human leucocyte anti­
gen (HLA)7 system. The first one, rs7192, is in the HLA-DR region and the
second one, rs9275596, is located in the HLA-DQ region. Most interesting,
both loci are also associated with differential DNA methylation. Therefore,
these results support the relevance of the HLA system as well as epigenetic
modifications in the predisposition to peanut allergy. In this study, though,
the food allergy outcome was defined based on a convincing history of
clinical allergic reaction on ingestion of a specified food and evidence of

6 Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) examine many common genetic variants in
different individuals to see if any variant is associated with a trait. GWASs typically focus on
associations between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and traits like major diseases
(Gottgens, 2012).
7 The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system is a gene complex located in chromosome
6p21 that encodes the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins, which are cell
proteins responsible for the regulation of the immune system. MHC class I, II, and III have
different functions. MCH class I present peptides from inside the cell, MHC class II present
antigens from outside of the cell to T-lymphocytes and stimulate the multiplication of T-helper
cells. MHC class III are components of the complement system.

154

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 5-2 Current Guidelines on Food Allergy Prevention
Guideline
(reference)
Interim Guidance
Regarding Peanut
Introduction from
the American
Academy of
Pediatrics; American
Academy of
Allergy, Asthma
& Immunology;
American College of
Allergy, Asthma &
Immunology; and
othersa
(Fleischer et al.,
2015)

Year

Country

2015

US, Australia,
Japan, European
Union (EU)

Breastfeeding

155

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

Early Introduction of
Foods

Infant Formula

Diet of Mother

Prebiotics or
Probiotics

Introduce peanutcontaining products
into the diets of ‘‘high­
risk’’ infants early on
in life (between 4 and
11 months of age) in
countries where peanut
allergy is prevalent.
Infants with early-onset
atopic disease, such as
severe eczema, or egg
allergy in the first 4 to
6 months of life (LEAP
criteria) might benefit
from evaluation by an
allergist or physician
to diagnose any food
allergy and assist in
implementing these
suggestions of early
peanut introduction.

continued

156

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 5-2 Continued
Guideline
(reference)

Year

Country

Breastfeeding

NIAID/NIH­
supported
Guidelines
(Boyce et al., 2010)

2010

US

Recommends that all
infants be exclusively
breastfed until 4 to
6 months of age,
unless breastfeeding
is contraindicated for
medical reasons.

2016 Addendum
to the NIAID/
NIH-supported
Guidelines
(Togias et al.,
2017)

2016

US

World Health
Organization and
World Allergy
Organization
(WHO, 2003)

2003

Worldwide

Breastfeed exclusively
until 6 months.

157

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

Early Introduction of
Foods

Infant Formula

Diet of Mother

Does not
recommend using
soy infant formula
instead of cow
milk infant formula
as a strategy for
preventing the
development of
food allergy or
modifying its
clinical course in
at-risk infants.

Does not
recommend
restricting
maternal diet
during pregnancy
or lactation as
a strategy for
preventing the
development or
clinical course of
food allergy.

Prebiotics or
Probiotics

Suggests that the
use of hydrolyzed
infant formulas,
as opposed to
cow milk formula,
may be considered
as a strategy for
preventing the
development of
food allergy in
at-risk infants who
are not exclusively
breastfed.
Suggests that the
introduction of solid
foods should not be
delayed beyond 4
to 6 months of age.
Potentially allergenic
foods may be
introduced at this time
as well.
Infants with
cow milk allergy
should avoid cow
milk proteins;
if a supplement
is needed, use
hypoallergenic
formula, if
available, and
affordable to
improve symptom
control.

No special diet
for the lactating
mother.

continued

158

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 5-2 Continued
Guideline
(reference)

Year

Country

Breastfeeding

American Academy
of Allergy, Asthma
& Immunology
(Fleischer et al.,
2013)

2013

US

Exclusive breastfeeding
for at least 4 and up to
6 months is endorsed.

European
Academy of
Allergy & Clinical
Immunology
Guidelines
(Muraro et al.,
2014)

2014

EU

Exclusive breastfeeding
for at least the first
4-6 months of life is
recommended.

159

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

Early Introduction of
Foods

Infant Formula

Diet of Mother

Complementary foods
can be introduced
between 4 and 6
months of age. Highly
allergenic foods can be
given as complementary
foods once a few
complementary foods
have been tolerated
first and should initially
be given at home first
rather than at day care
or a restaurant.

For high-risk
infants who cannot
be exclusively
breastfed,
hydrolyzed formula
appears to offer
advantages to
prevent allergic
disease and cow
milk allergy.

Avoidance diets
during pregnancy
and lactation are
not recommended
at this time, but
more research
is necessary for
peanut.

Introduction of
complementary foods
after the age of 4
months according
to normal standard
weaning practices
and nutrition
recommendations, for
all children irrespective
of atopic heredity.

For high-risk
infants: If a
supplement is
needed during the
first 4 months,
a documented
hypoallergenic
formula is
recommended.

No special diet
during pregnancy
or for the lactating
mother.

Prebiotics or
Probiotics

This
recommendation
does not apply
to infants who
manifest signs of
allergic disease
shortly after birth,
because treatment
may, in some cases,
involve dietary
interventions
during lactation.

continued

160

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 5-2 Continued
Guideline
(reference)
European Society
of Pediatric Allergy
and Clinical
Immunology and
the European
Society for Pediatric
Gastroenterology,
Hepatology,
and Nutrition
Committee on
Nutrition
(Agostoni et al.,
2008)

Year

Country

Breastfeeding

2008

Europe

Exclusive or full
breastfeeding for about
6 months
is a desirable goal.

161

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

Early Introduction of
Foods

Infant Formula

Diet of Mother

Prebiotics or
Probiotics

There is no convincing
scientific evidence
that avoidance or
delayed introduction of
potentially allergenic
foods, such as fish
and eggs, reduces
allergies, either in
infants considered
at increased risk for
the development of
allergy or in those not
considered to be at
increased risk.
Complementary
foods should not be
introduced before 17
weeks and foods should
be added one at a time
to allow detection of
reactions to individual
components.
It is prudent to avoid
both early (<4 months)
and late (>7 months)
introduction of gluten
and to introduce gluten
gradually while the
infant is still breastfed
because this may reduce
the risk of wheat
allergy.

continued

162

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 5-2 Continued
Guideline
(reference)
American Academy
of Pediatrics
(Greer et al., 2008)

Year

Country

Breastfeeding

2008

US

For infants at high
risk of developing
atopic disease, evidence
suggests that exclusive
breastfeeding for at least
4 months compared
with feeding intact cow
milk protein formula
decreases the cumulative
incidence of atopic
dermatitis and cow milk
allergy in the first 2
years of life.

163

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

Early Introduction of
Foods
Although solid
foods should not be
introduced before 4 to
6 months of age, there
is no current convincing
evidence that delaying
their introduction
beyond this period
has a significant
protective effect on
the development
of atopic disease
regardless of whether
infants are fed cow
milk protein formula
or human milk. This
includes delaying the
introduction of foods
that are considered
to be highly allergic,
such as fish, eggs, and
foods containing peanut
protein.
For infants after 4 to
6 months of age, there
are insufficient data to
support a protective
effect of any dietary
intervention for the
development of atopic
disease.

Infant Formula

Diet of Mother

In studies of
infants at high
risk of developing
atopic disease who
are not breastfed
exclusively for 4
to 6 months or
are formula fed,
there is modest
evidence that
atopic dermatitis
may be delayed or
prevented by the
use of extensively
or partially
hydrolyzed
formulas,
compared with
cow milk formula,
in early childhood.

Current evidence
does not support
a major role for
maternal dietary
restrictions during
pregnancy or
lactation.

Prebiotics or
Probiotics

Extensively
hydrolyzed
formulas may be
more effective
than partially
hydrolyzed in
the prevention of
atopic disease.
There is no
convincing
evidence for the use
of soy-based infant
formula for the
purpose of allergy
prevention.

continued

164

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 5-2 Continued
Guideline
(reference)

Year

Country

Breastfeeding

National Health
Service
(NHS, 2015b)

2015

UK

Breast milk or first
infant formula for first 6
months.

National Health
and Medical
Research Council
(NHMRC, 2013)

2012

Australia

Exclusive breastfeeding
until around 6 months
of age.
For infants with a
family history of allergy,
continue breastfeeding
while introducing solid
foods.

165

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

Early Introduction of
Foods
Introduce cow milk,
eggs, wheat, gluten,
nuts, peanuts, peanut
products, seeds, fish
and shellfish one at a
time and not before 6
months.

Infant Formula

Diet of Mother

Prebiotics or
Probiotics

Infant formula
made from cow
or goat milk is
the only suitable
alternative to
breast milk in the
first 12 months.
Only use soy-based
infant formula if
advised by health
care provider.
Follow-on milks
are available for
babies older than
6 months, but
there is no need
to change over to
these.
If child has
an allergy or
intolerance to
milk, health care
provider can advise
on suitable milk
alternatives.

For infants with a
family history of
allergy, solid foods
should be introduced at
about 6 months of age.

If breastfeeding is
discontinued for
any reason, there
is no advantage
in using special
formulas, except
under medical
supervision.

Dietary elimination
of potential
allergens during
pregnancy is not
recommended
for preventing
childhood allergy.

The evidence
on probiotics
or prebiotics in
infant formula
to prevent atopic
disease varies.

Soy-based formulas
do not prevent or
reduce the risk of
developing allergies
and are not a
suitable alternative
to cow milk–based
formulas.
continued

166

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 5-2 Continued
Guideline
(reference)

Year

Country

Breastfeeding

Australasian
Society of Clinical
Immunology and
Allergy
(ASCIA, 2016a,b)

2016

Australia

Breastfeeding is
recommended for at
least 6 months.b

Academy of
Nutrition and
Dietetics
(AND, 2015)

2015

US

Exclusive breastfeeding
provides optimal
nutrition and health
protection for the first
6 months of life and
breastfeeding with
complementary foods
from 6 months until
at least 12 months of
age is the ideal feeding
pattern for infants.
Breastfeeding should be
supported and preserved
even under adverse or
challenging conditions,
such as prematurity,
allergies, chronic illness,
and multiple births.

NOTE: UK = United Kingdom; US = United States.
a Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Canadian Society of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology, European Academy of Allergy & Clinical Immunology, Israel As­
sociation of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Japanese Society for Allergology, Society for
Pediatric Dermatology, and World Allergy Organization.
b For all infants (not as a prevention for allergic diseases).

167

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

Early Introduction of
Foods
Recommends the
introduction of
complementary “solid”
foods within the
window of 4-6 months
and preferably while
breastfeeding, regardless
of whether the food
is considered to be a
common food allergen.

Infant Formula

Diet of Mother

In children with
confirmed cow
milk and soy
allergy, appropriate
formula is available
on prescription.

Exclusion of any
particular foods
(including foods
considered to be
highly allergenic)
from the maternal
diet during
pregnancy or
breastfeeding is not
recommended.

There is no
consistent
convincing
evidence to support
a protective role
for partially
hydrolysed
formulas or
extensively
hydrolyzed
formulas for the
prevention of food
allergy in infants or
children.

Prebiotics or
Probiotics
Recommendations
about probiotic
supplements
cannot currently
be made.

168

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE 5-3 Evidence-Based Review Grading System Used by the
Committee to Evaluate the Association Between Potential Risk
Determinants and Food Allergies
Strong

The conclusion statement is substantiated by a large, high
quality, and/or consistent body of evidence that directly
addresses the question. There is a high level of certainty
that the conclusion is generalizable to the population
of interest, and it is unlikely to change if new evidence
emerges.

Moderate

The conclusion statement is substantiated by sufficient
evidence, but the level of certainty is restricted by
limitations in the evidence, such as the amount of evidence
available, inconsistencies in findings, or methodological or
generalizability concerns. If new evidence emerges, there
could be modifications to the conclusion statement.

Limited

The conclusion statement is substantiated by insufficient
evidence, and the level of certainty is seriously restricted by
limitations in the evidence, such as the amount of evidence
available, inconsistencies in findings, or methodological or
generalizability concerns. If new evidence emerges, there
could likely be modifications to the conclusion statement.

Grade not assignable

A conclusion statement cannot be drawn due to a lack
of evidence, or the availability of evidence has serious
methodological concerns.

SOURCE: DGAC, 2015.

sensitization to the same food measured by sIgE and/or a positive skin prick
test (SPT) to this specified food, not by OFC.
Overall, evidence exists of genetic predisposition for food allergy based
on family aggregation (Tsai et al., 2009) and heritability studies (Liu et
al., 2009; Sicherer et al., 2000), the latter showing a wide range of values
between 0.15 and 0.88. However, as with other complex diseases that are
polygenic, challenges remain to identify what contribute to the “missing
heritability.”
The committee concludes that although some evidence from various
lines of investigation suggests that genetics contribute to the development
of food allergies, none of the studies on the association of food allergy with
specific loci examined to date has provided conclusive and consistent find­
ings across populations.
Interaction Between Genetics and Environment: Migration Studies
As mentioned above, environmental exposures, including lifestyle and
diet, interact with genetic predisposition to modify the risk of disease. The

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

169

FIGURE 5-2 Major genetic and environmental determinants of food allergy risk.

“natural experiment” of migration has provided an opportunity to postu­
late a possible protective effect of the Asian environment on Asian children
that is removed on migration to a developed country such as the United
States or Australia, where risk of allergic disease rises. In HealthNuts,
challenge-confirmed peanut allergy was about three times more common
in infants whose parents were born in East Asia compared to those with
parents born in Australia (Koplin et al., 2014). Similar effects were seen for
other food sensitizations and food allergies and for eczema. This increased
risk appears to have occurred in a single generation and to be specific to
infants of Asian parents. This effect was not seen among infants whose
parents were born in the United Kingdom or Europe.
More recently in a large cohort of more than 65,000 children whose
parents undertook a survey as their children entered primary school (age 5
years), the finding of increased rates of nut allergy in Asian children born in
Australia was replicated. However the most intriguing observation in this
study was the finding that children born in Asia who subsequently migrated
to Australia before the age of 5 years were protected from the development
of food allergy (Panjari et al., 2016).
Migration may be associated with changes to a number of factors (some
of which were not measured in HealthNuts) that might be inter-related
(Allen and Koplin, 2015) (see Figure 5-3). These include humidity (and its
impact on skin barrier function), microbial exposure (hygiene hypothesis),
and dietary changes and changes in latitude (vitamin D). For example,
changes to the skin barrier function and risk of eczema as an early risk fac­
tor of food allergy may result from higher humidity in Asia than Australia

Study Design,
Country

Observational,
Europe

Observational,
UK

Observational,
Canada

Observational,
US

Author, Year

Senechal et al.,
1999

Hand et al.,
2004

Madore et al.,
2013

Hong et al.,
2015

Participants in
the Chicago Food
Allergy Study

Controls: mean age
4 years

Peanut-allergic
Caucasian children,
mean age 11 years

Atopic controls:
ages 16-61 years;
31 male
51 female

Allergy clinic
patients:
ages 3-56 years;
81 white
3 mixed race
40 male
44 female

European-born
white adults

Population

1,315 children
1,444 parents

332 controls

590 cases

1,798 random
blood donors

82 atopic non­
nut-allergic
patients

84 nut-allergic
patients

42 atopic
42 healthy

N

HLA

HLA

HLA

HLA

Peanut allergy

Peanut allergy

Nut allergy
(peanut, Brazil
nut, hazelnut,
walnut, cashew,
almond, and
pecan)

Apple allergy

Candidate Gene Outcome

TABLE 5-4 Summary of Studies Associating Speciﬁc Genes with Food Allergy

HLA-DR and -DQ
gene region at 6p21.32,
tagged by rs7192 and
rs9275596

HLA-DQB1*02 and
HLA-DQB1*06:03P
associated with peanut
allergy

Increased for
HLA-beta*07 and
HLA-DRB1*11, HLA­
DRB*13, and HLA­
DQB1*06 alleles

Association with the
HLA-DRB1*07 allele

Summary

170

Observational,
US

Observational,
Japan

Case series,
France

Observational,
US

Woo et al., 2003

Campos et al.,
2007

Torgerson et al.,
2007

Siegel et al.,
2013
65 patients
with severe
atopic disease

41 healthy
controls

Controls: 61%
female, mean age
34.5 years

11

88 cases
101 controls

77 cases
61 controls

Atopic patients:
40% female, mean
age 14.8 years

Index case with
IPEX syndrome
and other family
members

Non-food-allergic
controls, mean age
9.45 years

Food-allergic
children, mean age
7.1 years

Non-atopic, nonasthmatic adult
controls

Food allergic
patients, mean age
5.2 years, 74%
male, 83% white

STAT3

FOXP3

CD14

CD14

Food allergies
(egg, milk, or
peanut)

Severe food
allergy

Food Allergy

Food allergy

continued

Complex association
between this locus and
allergic phenotypes

1300-bp deletion could
cause severe food
allergy

No association with the
C-159T or the C-550T

The C-159T SNP
associated with food
allergy

171

Study Design,
Country

Observational,
UK

Observational,
Japan

Observational,
Japan

Observational,
Japan

Observational,
Japan

Author, Year

Amoli et al.,
2002

Negoro et al.,
2006

Kusunoki et al.,
2005

Negoro et al.,
2006

Campos et al.,
2008

TABLE 5-4 Continued

Atopic control
children without
food allergy, mean
age 8.2 years, 64%
male

Food-allergic
children, mean age
7.6 years, 63% male

Allergic children,
mean age 7.3 years

Children with
atopic dermatitis,
>5 years of age

Allergic children

UK Caucasian
blood donors

Healthy atopic,
non-allergic controls

Nut-allergic,
Caucasian patients,
mean age 10 years

Population

111 cases
115 controls

220

118

220

184 blood
donors

71 patients
45 controls

N

IL10

IL10

SPINK5

STAT6

STAT6

Food allergy

No association with the
C-627A SNP; but the
-1082AA genotype was
associated with higher
risk

No association with the
C-627A SNP

The 1258AA or
1258AG carriers have
higher prevalence of
food allergy

Food allergy

Food allergy

No association of
G2964A and severity of
food allergy

The G allele at the
G2964A SNP increased
in nut-allergic patients.

Summary

Food allergy

Nut-allergy
(peanut, cashew,
Brazil nut,
pecan, almond,
hazelnut, or
walnut)

Candidate Gene Outcome

172

Observational,
Taiwan

Observational,
Germany

Observational,
Australia

Observational,
UK

Observational,
Australia

Chen et al.,
2012

Liu et al., 2004

Gaudieri et al.,
2012

Venkataraman et
al., 2014

Tan et al., 2012a

HealthNuts Cohort
study participants;
white infants, age
1 year

Isle of Wight birth
cohort; children
ages 1-18 years

Children recruited
antenatally from
healthy pregnant
mothers; followed
from birth to age 5
years

German children
who participated
in the German
Multicenter Allergy
Study

Non-food-allergic
controls, age range
1-59 years, 40%
male

Food-allergic
patients, age range
1-32 years; 62%
male

FLG

FLG

1,456

700

IL28B

IL13

IL10

35 allergic
35 non-allergic

823

37 cases
52 controls

Food
sensitization/
allergy

Food allergy

Food allergy

Food
sensitization

Food allergy

continued

FLG LOF mutations
do not increase the
risk of food allergies
beyond that of food
sensitization

FLG LOF mutations
associated with food
allergy.

The rs12979860 SNP
associated positively
with food allergy

C-1055T higher risk

Both the -1082A/G and
the -592A/C SNPs were
associated with food
allergies

173

Observational,
UK

Observational,
China

Observational,
Germany

Brough et al.,
2014

Li et al., 2012

Oxelius et al.,
2015

Children from the
German Multicenter
Allergy Study,
Caucasian, age 1
year or 10 years

Atopic dermatitis
outpatients, mean
age 3.5 years,
64.3% male

Birth cohort of the
Manchester Asthma
and Allergy Study,
children ages 1-11
years

Population

194

249

1,184

N

IGHG genes

FLG

FLG

Food
sensitization

Food
sensitization

Peanut allergy

Candidate Gene Outcome

The IGHG*bfn
haplotype (B*bfn cells)
and increased innate
IgG2*n levels are
predictive factors for
IgE food sensitization
in childhood

Interaction of K4671X
mutation and the
combined mutations
in FLG related to
sensitization to peanut
allergens in patients
with atopic dermatitis

Positive association
with peanut allergy

Summary

NOTE: FLG = ﬁlaggrin; HLA = human leukocyte antigen; IGHG = immunoglobulin heavy locus gene; IL = interleukin; LOF = loss of function; UK
= United Kingdom; US = United States.

Study Design,
Country

Author, Year

TABLE 5-4 Continued

174

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

Modifiable lifestyle risk factors that could explain the rise in food allergy risk in offspring of
Asian migrants in Australia

Asia

Low rates of infantile eczema
High ambient humidity
?Less soap use

Asia: Genetic
risk…
Increased rates of
food allergy in
Asian migrant
offspring
in Australia

Asia

175

Asia

Diverse microbe exposure
Larger families/more crowding
More exposure to animals
Less clean food and water supply
Higher rates of H pylori and
parasites
Less antibiotics in personal
health and food chain
Lower rates of Caesarean section

Asia

Non-Westernised diet
Eg boiled vs roasted peanut
Higher fruit and veg
?different infant feeding
patterns

?Vitamin D sufficiency or Vit D binding
protective SNPs
Closer to equator – increased UVR
exposure
?Less sun avoidance

Koplin Pediatric
Clinicsexplain
In Press the rise in food
FIGURE 5-3 Modifiable lifestyleAllen
risk&factors
that could
allergy risk in offspring of Asian migrants in Australia.
NOTE: SNP = single nucleotide polymorphism; UVR = ultraviolet radiation.
SOURCE: Allen and Koplin, 2015. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.

but equally may result from differences in infant washing practices (types
of soap and water composition) that occur in each country and may exert
an effect through the hygiene hypothesis. Microbial exposure factors that
differ not only include variations in the quality of water supply (and dif­
ferences in risk of waterborne gastrointestinal infections) but also differ­
ences in microbes that are a part of the food chain supply (for example, in
unwashed vegetables or higher use of antibiotics in the food chain supply
of meat-producing animals), number of children in a family, and issues of
crowding and exposure to pets, farm animals, and stray animals (which
may have higher rates of parasites), and variations in overprescribing of
antibiotics in each region. Dietary differences are multiple (e.g., higher use
of herbicides and pesticides that might affect the microbial load of food and
increased sterilization; use of plastic in developed countries; cooking prac­
tices that may alter the allergenicity of food; different vitamin D status).
Epigenetics
The contribution of epigenetics has been more extensively studied for
other allergic diseases, including asthma, eczema, and allergic rhinitis, as
reviewed by Hong and Wang (2014), than for food allergies. In light of the

176

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

atopic march and common comorbidities between food allergies and these
other allergic diseases, one may speculate that a link between epigenetic
changes and the development of food allergies is possible, but at this time
the evidence is quite limited and comes from indirect studies such as the
migration studies described above.
Direct evidence to establish the relevance of epigenetic changes as a
mediator of genetic susceptibility to food allergies is very limited. The
most up-to-date knowledge about the role of epigenetics in food allergy
has been summarized in a recent review by Neeland et al. (2015). In their
epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) of food allergies,8 Martino et
al. measured genome-wide DNA methylation profiles from CD4+ T-cells
(see Chapter 2) on a birth cohort of 12 children with IgE-mediated food
allergy diagnosed at 12 months; 12 individuals with no food allergies
were controls (Martino et al., 2014). A number of statistically signifi­
cant differentially methylated probes (DMPs) were identified from DNA
obtained from samples taken at birth and at 12 months of age. Of interest
is the finding of 96 allergy-associated non-SNP DMPs that were present
at time of birth before the expression of the disease. These could be caus­
ally related to its expression, including several mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) signaling molecules. Therefore, the authors concluded
that “dysregulation of DNA methylation at MAPK signaling-associated
genes during early CD4+ T-cell development may contribute to suboptimal
T-lymphocyte responses in early childhood” that could influence the devel­
opment of food allergy (Martino et al., 2014). However, this is a small
study and, therefore, its findings need independent validation in larger
studies and other populations.
Support for a role of epigenetics in food allergies is provided by the
results from a food allergy GWAS carried out in 2,759 U.S. participants
(1,315 children and 1,444 parents) from the Chicago Food Allergy Study
(Hong et al., 2015). In a recent study in the Chicago cohort, Hong et al.
conducted an EWAS of cow milk allergy using a two-stage approach (Hong
et al., 2016). During the discovery stage, DNA methylation was measured
at 485,512 genomic loci in whole blood samples from 106 Caucasian chil­
dren with cow milk allergy (cases) and 76 nonallergic and nonatopic Cau­
casian children (controls) using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 arrays.
The findings were confirmed in a small replication sample (5 cases and 20
controls). The researchers demonstrated that altered DNA methylation in
genes involved in the Th1-Th2 pathways and some novel candidate genes
are associated with cow milk allergy.
8 Epigenome-wide association studies (EWASs) are large-scale, systematic studies that
explore the association between the epigenetic variations and diseases, equivalent to genomewide association studies (GWASs).

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

177

The committee concludes that relative to other immune-related dis­
eases, only a few studies have been conducted that directly support a con­
tribution of epigenetic factors to the development of food allergies. Limited
evidence from ecological studies and studies on methylation signatures of
participants with food allergies suggest that gene-environment interactions
and underlying epigenetic mechanisms need to be taken into account when
exploring potential pre- and postnatal risk factors for food allergy.
ENVIRONMENTAL RISK FACTORS
Microbial Exposure Hypotheses
As mentioned in Box 5-1, evidence increasingly suggests that the inter­
action between the host microbiome and the immune system is essential to
the development of immune regulation and oral tolerance (Martin et al.,
2010). Exposure to microbes after birth prompts the maturation of the
mucosal immune system (Kelly et al., 2007). The composition and timing
of exposure to gut microbiota, and their possible role in disease develop­
ment or prevention have been considered as explanations for the develop­
ment of food allergy (Li et al., 2014; McLoughlin and Mills, 2011; Prince
et al., 2015). The microbial hypothesis proposes that a decrease in early
childhood exposure to microbes or their products may hinder the normal
development of early immunoregulatory responses. This leaves the immune
system more susceptible to inappropriate reactivity to innocuous antigens,
resulting in the development of ‘‘allergic’’ diseases.
The overall microbial hypothesis encompasses two different concepts—
the “Hygiene Hypothesis” and the “Old Friends Hypothesis.” The Hygiene
Hypothesis, originally explained in the landmark paper by David Strachan
in 1989, described a protective effect of an increasing number of siblings
in a household on the risk of developing allergic rhinitis (Strachan, 1989).
This was thought to potentially relate to the shared exposure to common
childhood infections transmitted through direct contact with older siblings
or by maternal contact with her older children prenatally. Although a pro­
tective sibling effect has been confirmed for challenge-proven food allergy
outcomes (Koplin et al., 2012a) and for various food sensitization and
allergy outcomes (Marrs et al., 2013), the mechanism(s) underlying this
phenomenon is not clear. Although the finding is interesting and reproduc­
ible, changes to postwar houses and sanitation, and sizes of families, as well
as the emergence of national immunization programs with high uptakes,
also should be considered in attempting to identify the mechanisms underly­
ing the protective effects of siblings.
Second, evidence of a protective effect of dog ownership on food allergy
risk may point to the benefit of sharing of microbes or even parasites, the

178

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

latter underpinning the idea of the Old Friends hypothesis. Although this
hypothesis was predicated on the assumption that IgE antibody–associated
immune responses developed in part as a mechanism of host defense against
parasite infestation, recent evidence indicates that, at least in mice, IgE
antibody–associated immune response also can confer increased acquired
resistance to the morbidity and mortality induced by arthropod and reptile
venoms (Galli et al., 2016; Marichal et al., 2013; Palm et al., 2013; Starkl
et al., 2016). Speaking more broadly, early evidence suggests a difference
between the prevalence of food allergy in rural versus urban environments
that appears to be reflected in rising rates of food allergy described in cities
in China undergoing rapid urbanization (Hu et. al., 2010).
The main environmental factors contributing to the microbial exposure
hypothesis include route of delivery at birth, antibiotic use, exposure to
pets/animals, and immunization. Breastfeeding has been linked to infant
immune development (Praveen et al., 2015) and the composition of the
microbiota (Azad et al., 2016). It would therefore be plausible that a
mechanism linking food allergy risk and breastfeeding could be mediated
through microbiome modulation (Fooladi et al., 2013). However, no pub­
lished studies to date have investigated this hypothesis, and the data linking
breastfeeding and food allergy are inconclusive, potentially due to reverse
causality and the inability to randomize infants for breast- versus formulafeeding. Therefore breastfeeding will not be included in this section; instead
the effect of breastfeeding is included as part of the “Allergen Avoidance
Hypothesis” (see p. 185). The ingestion of prebiotics and probiotics could
modify the gut microbiota in a way to change immune system functionality
and atopic diseases. Therefore, their use as potential risk factor for food
allergies also is included.
A systematic review of the evidence linking microbial exposure and
food allergy was published by Marrs et al. (Marrs et al., 2013). The authors
reviewed scientific publications available in Medline between 1948 and July
2012. The key findings of this review will be briefly summarized below, but
the focus will be on reviewing the findings of papers published since July
2012.
Gut Microbiota and the Use of Probiotics and Prebiotics
Data on microbial profiling and its relationship to disease are still not
sufficiently detailed to consider specific microbiota modifications as a food
allergy prevention strategy. However, some emerging data suggest that
changes in microbiota could influence food allergies, offering further sup­
port for the microbial exposure hypothesis (West et al., 2015).
Marrs et al. included five studies in their systematic review that inves­
tigated characteristics of gut microbiota, two of which used food challenge

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

179

outcomes and three that used food sensitization parameters (Marrs et al.,
2013). The two manuscripts that ranked highest in quality and measured
food allergy were from the same study of Spanish infants who were diag­
nosed with IgE-mediated cow milk allergy by milk challenge at a tertiary
referral center. Differences in microbiota were identified but unfortunately
none of the results was adjusted for diet. The Marrs review also included 11
RCTs in which microbial supplementation was the intervention as a poten­
tial prevention or treatment of food allergies or sensitization. Although the
quality varied, the two highest quality studies that measured food allergy by
OFC to assess whether microbial supplementation may be used to prevent
or treat food allergies or sensitization found no benefit.
More recent data originate from the Canadian Synergy in Microbiota
(SyMBIOTA) study, part of a larger Canadian research effort on the micro­
biota. This large 6-year longitudinal study is using metadata and samples
from the Canadian Healthy Infant Longitudinal cohort to discern rela­
tionships between infant fecal microbiota and each of a group of factors,
including antibiotic use, pets, and food sensitization (Kozyrskyj, 2015).
Their data suggest that lower species richness in microbiota of infants
(N=166, ages 3 and 12 months) might be a predictor of food (i.e., for egg,
milk, and peanut) sensitization (SPT at age 12 months), even when adjust­
ing for birth delivery mode, antibiotic use, or breastfeeding (Azad et al.,
2015). Their research also revealed that sensitization occurred after the
changes in microbiota diversity and richness, two commonly used indexes.
Therefore, this ratio could potentially be used as a predictor of food sensi­
tization, a potential surrogate for food allergies. Each quartile increase in
richness at 3 months was associated with a 55 percent reduction in risk for
food sensitization by 1 year (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 0.45; 95% confi­
dence interval [CI]: 0.23-0.87).
One meta-analysis of 10 RCTs (Kong et al., 2014) reported no signifi­
cant difference in the incidence of food allergies comparing prenatal and
postnatal probiotics supplementation with placebo or control. However,
the food allergy assessments were not described in the meta-analysis. The
World Allergy Organization (WAO) has recently conducted a systematic
review on the relationship between supplementing the diet of pregnant or
lactating women or infants with probiotics and allergy diseases. Six trials
explored the relationship with food allergies but none of them made the
direct comparison of probiotics versus no probiotics in pregnant women or
in breastfeeding women for prevention of allergy in their children. None of
the trials found differences in food allergy with probiotic supplementation
(Cuello-Garcia et al., 2015). Two additional observational studies found
during the committees’ evidence-based search did not find an associa­
tion between the addition of probiotics to infants’ diets (Loo et al., 2014;
West et al., 2013). The most recent work on the effect of prebiotics in

180

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

food allergy, also conducted by the WAO (Cuello-Garcia et al., 2016), is
a guideline that seems to be based on a systematic review. The methods of
systematic review, however, were not fully reported and no other source
or citation to the systematic review was found. The guideline is based on
studies investigating the relationship between prebiotics consumption by
women during pregnancy or lactation and by healthy infants for preventing
various allergic symptoms, including food allergy. Only one intervention
study assessed the risk of developing food allergy in infants consuming an
infant formula containing oligosacharides (Ivakhnenko and Nyankovskyy,
2013). That study (N=240) found that infants who had been fed with
breast milk or oligosaccharide-supplemented infant formula had signifi­
cantly fewer allergic reactions to food products compared to the infants fed
the standard formula (3.92 percent and 4.84 percent versus 16.98 percent,
respectively; P<0.05).
The committee concludes that, at this time, only a few studies have
been conducted on the relationship between changes in the microbiota and
food sensitization and, therefore, the evidence supporting this relationship
is limited. RCTs on probiotic and prebiotics supplementation are few and
have methodological limitations. Therefore, the committee concludes that
the evidence is limited and does not yet support a decrease in food allergy
risk from the use of probiotics or prebiotics by pregnant and lactating
women or by infants. Additional research would be needed before recom­
mending the use of prebiotics or probiotics to prevent the onset of food
allergies.
Route of Delivery
The composition of the gut microbiota is influenced by route of deliv­
ery. Vaginally-delivered infants harbor bacterial communities resembling
their mother’s vaginal microbiota. In contrast, infants delivered by cesar­
ean section have bacterial communities similar to those found on the skin
surface (Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010). In light of the fact that the gut
microbiome plays a central role in the development of immune regulation
and oral tolerance, it is not surprising that investigators have examined the
question of whether caesarean delivery increased the risk of food allergy.
In their systematic review, Marrs et al. identified 13 publications. Of
these, five identified food allergy through OFCs. All 13 publications, except
for the study of lowest quality, reported an increased risk of developing
food allergy or food sensitization in children delivered by cesarean section
(Marrs et al., 2013). Six of these associations were significant. However,
only two included clinical food allergy diagnoses. Of the studies included
for review, these two studies yielded the highest quality data. The stud­
ies used 2,803 consecutive mother-infant pairs from a Norwegian birth

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

181

cohort surveyed at 12, 18, and 24 months. When children were challenged
with food orally using open or double-blind protocols, cesarean section
was associated with a significantly higher risk for cow milk allergy. This
occurred only in the subgroup of children with atopic mothers, however
(aOR: 9.6 [95% CI: 1.8-52.4]) (Eggesbo et al., 2005). They also observed
a nonsignificant 60 percent increase in egg allergy risk up to age 2 years
(Eggesbo et al., 2003).
The Marrs review also included a prospective nested case-control
study of 16,237 infants in Finland, ages 0 to 2 years (Metsala et al., 2010).
Infants whose parents had received a reimbursement for the cost of special­
ized formula based on diagnosis of cow milk allergy were recruited, and
the allergy was certified by a pediatrician using clinical exam, symptoms,
elimination diet, SPT, and elevated sIgE or open challenge test (Metsala
et al., 2010). Controls were randomly selected infants who were matched
for age, sex, and delivery hospital. A significant relationship between
cesarean delivery and cow milk allergy was observed (aOR: 1.18; 95%
CI: 1.10-1.27).
Lodge et al. conducted a more recent review of systematic reviews and
found two systematic reviews that included six original studies (Lodge et
al., 2013). An association between cesarean section delivery and increase in
food allergy is seen in only the three smallest studies. Two of these studies
used specific IgE to food allergens as the outcome measurement. No con­
clusion was reached by the authors due to methodological flaws (i.e., small
size studies or inaccurate food allergy measurement).
Since the Marrs’ systematic review, six prospective cohort studies inves­
tigating associations between cesarean delivery and allergy risk have been
published. They include studies conducted in Australia (Peters et al., 2014),
France (Pele et al., 2013), the United Kingdom (Grimshaw et al., 2014), the
United States (Luccioli et al., 2014; McGowan et al., 2015), and a five-coun­
try study (Depner et al., 2013) totaling 25,688 cases and controls. Overall,
these studies found no significant associations between cesarean delivery and
a variety of food allergies. The age of the children in the studies ranged from
0 to 5 years, and most included physician-diagnosed food allergy. Minimum
criteria for diagnosis were sIgE to food allergen or a positive SPT. However,
Luccioli et al. used physician diagnosis based on parental report (Luccioli et
al., 2014). The largest study was the Australian HealthNuts Study (Peters
et al., 2014), which recruited 5,276 infants at immunization clinics. These
infants (2,848 of the total recruited) were investigated for open challengeproven egg, peanut, and sesame allergy. However, no significant association
was demonstrated with mode of delivery (Peters et al., 2014). Two retrospec­
tive case-control studies from Finland (N=3,181) (Pyrhonen et al., 2013) and
the United States (N=291) (Dowhower Karpa et al., 2012) also did not show
an association between cesarean delivery and food allergy.

182

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

The variation in association between mode of delivery and risk of food
allergy may be partly explained by the fact that some studies have been
unable to distinguish between whether cesarean delivery had been done
on an elective or emergency basis (e.g., Koplin et al., 2012a; Peters et al.,
2014). Emergency cesarean delivery is generally associated with rupture
of membranes. As a result, the baby has some exposure to vaginal com­
mensal bacteria during labor. However, the exposure is not usually to the
same extent as vaginal delivery. However, because the proportion of emer­
gency cesarean deliveries is usually relatively small compared to elective
cesarean deliveries, we would still expect to see some association between
mode of delivery and food allergy. This would be true even in those stud­
ies that could not differentiate emergency from elective cesarean deliver­
ies, particularly in the larger and better powered studies. It also should
be noted that the association between cesarean delivery and allergic risk
could be misinterpreted due to the potential for reverse causation similar
to breastfeeding.
Only a few observational studies have been conducted on the rela­
tionship between food sensitization or food allergy and cesarean delivery.
The studies have methodological limitations. Therefore, the committee
concludes that, at this time, evidence to support an increased risk for food
sensitization or food allergy due to giving birth by cesarean delivery is lim­
ited. Strong evidence is unlikely to be forthcoming because of the ethical
inability to randomize a population to deliver a baby by cesarean section.
However, additional prospective research studies are needed.
Antibiotic Use
Antibiotics are known to cause short-term and, in some cases, lasting
alterations in the microbiota (Faa et al., 2013). Infants can be exposed to
antibiotics pre-, peri-, or postnatally as individual exposures or multiple
exposures across this time, when the microbiome is not well established
and is more susceptible to perturbations. The Marrs et al. systematic review
reported no relationship between antenatal or postnatal antibiotic exposure
and increased risk of food allergy (Marrs et al., 2013).
Since 2012, two prospective cohort studies of food allergic children
have been published that were not included in the Marrs systematic review
(Marrs et al., 2013). Studies in Finland (Metsala et al., 2013) and the United
Kingdom (Grimshaw et al., 2014) and one retrospective case control study
from the United States (Dowhower-Karpa et al., 2012) investigated asso­
ciations between antibiotic exposure and food allergy risk. In those infants
whose mother used antibiotics before or during pregnancy, respectively,
the Finnish prospective, nested case-control study (N=16,237) reported a
statistically significant 26 percent (aOR: 1.26; 95% CI: 1.20-1.33) and 21

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

183

percent (aOR: 1.21; 95% CI: 1.14-1.28) increased risk for cow milk allergy
(determined by OFC) (Metsala et al., 2013). An even greater risk of cow
milk allergy (aOR: 1.71; 95% CI: 1.59-1.84) was reported in infants who
were treated with antibiotics between birth and 1 month of age (Metsala
et al., 2013).
However, two other studies described below showed no statistically
significant association. Cases (N=41) and controls (N=82) in the UK study
were drawn from the Prevalence of Infant Food Allergy (PIFA) study
(Grimshaw et al., 2014). Children in this study were part of the larger EuroPrevall birth cohort. Food allergy was diagnosed using SPT, physical exam,
clinical history, sIgE, and DBPCOFC. Maternal antibiotic use during or
after pregnancy or during breastfeeding was not associated with increased
risk of food allergy in the infant. However, administration of the antibiotic
to the infant was not assessed (Grimshaw et al., 2014). In a retrospective
case (N=99) control (N=192) design, Dowhower Karpa et al. found no
association between peripartum or neonatal antibiotic exposure and food
allergy, diagnosed by positive sIgE or SPT (Dowhower Karpa et al., 2012).
Thus, taking together the results of the Marrs systematic review (Marrs
et al., 2013) and the three studies published since, only one study (Metsala
et al., 2013) has reported a link between antibiotic use and food allergy.
The strengths of that study is the large sample size (more than 16,000 chil­
dren) and the prospective design. However, additional studies are needed
to conclusively demonstrate a link between antibiotic use in early life and
food allergy risk.
Only a few studies have explored the relationship between food allergies
and antibiotic use. The committee concludes that evidence from observa­
tional studies suggesting a link between antibiotic use in early life and food
allergies is limited. Additional studies with information on the type and
dose of antibiotic, the timing of exposure along the perinatal continuum,
and whether the infant is repeatedly exposed are needed to conclusively
demonstrate a link with food allergies.
Animal Exposure
As noted above, the premise of the “Hygiene” and “Old Friends”
hypotheses is based on the concept that the lack of early childhood exposure
to infectious agents, symbiotic microorganisms, and/or parasites increases
susceptibility to allergic diseases and asthma by suppressing the natural
development of the immune system (Strachan, 1989).
The Marrs review reported on four studies investigating associations
between farm and animal exposure and food allergy (Marrs et al., 2013).
In their review, only the HealthNuts Study supported the microbial hypoth­
esis. The study reported data on risk of pets and siblings for the develop­

184

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

ment of challenge-proven egg allergy (Koplin et al., 2012a). It also assessed
the role of these factors on any food allergy using latent class analysis, a
sophisticated analytical epidemiological method (Peters et al., 2015). Marrs
et al. also reported findings from the European Protection against Allergy
Study in Rural Environments (PASTURE), which described a cohort of
families living in proximity to farm animals in rural settings (Marrs et al.,
2013). This study showed significantly less food sensitization in the cord
blood of mothers who consumed raw cow milk (versus boiled milk) in the
perinatal period. However, the authors applied a lower cutoff for sIgE con­
centration than is conventionally used (>0.2 versus 0.35 IU/ml), which may
have overestimated the incidence of food sensitization (Ege et al., 2008).
Since 2012, several prospective cohort studies have investigated whether
exposure to farm animals (Depner et al., 2013; Pele et al., 2013) or pets
(Goldberg al., 2013; Grimshaw et al., 2014; Martin et al., 2015; Peters et
al., 2015; Stelmach et al., 2014) influenced the risk of food allergy or food
sensitization. Depner et al. performed an additional analysis of data from
686 children in the rural European PASTURE cohort (Depner et al., 2013).
Again using sIgE as their diagnostic criterion for food sensitization, they
explored the more traditionally used sIgE cutoff of 0.35 IU/ml compared
to 0.2 IU/ml in their previous study by Ege et al. (2008). They found that
allergen-specific IgE levels rarely exceeded 0.35 IU/mL (<3% of all children)
at age 1 year and the 95th percentiles at 1 year were consistently less than
0.7 IU/mL (RAST class 2) for any IgE. The only exception was cat (1.3
IU/mL) (Depner et al., 2013). They also found that early life exposure to
farm animals, such as sheep, goats, and rabbits, did not confer protection
against food allergen sensitization. However, exposure to farming increased
(P=0.0015) the risk of food allergen sensitization (aOR: 2.11; 95% CI:
1.33-3.34). A total of 793 (378 farm and 415 nonfarm) children were
included in the analyses. Pele et al. also reported no effect of farm animal
contact on food allergy incidence in more than 1,400 children participat­
ing in the PELAGIE mother–child cohort. However, mold or dampness in
the home increased (P≤0.001) the incidence of food allergy (23.9% versus
8.8%, yes versus no) in this cohort, as measured by parent report (Pele et
al., 2013).
All other prospective cohort studies published since 2012 investigated
exposure to pets. Two studies with a total of 350 children reported no asso­
ciation between pets in the home (Israel) and food sensitization (measured
by specific IgE to cow milk) (Goldberg et al., 2013) nor an association
of pet ownership (United Kingdom) with food allergy risk (measured by
DBPCOFC or convincing history of anaphylaxis) (Grimshaw et al., 2014).
In contrast, Stelmach et al. reported an increased risk of food allergy based
on diagnosis by a doctor following international guidelines (aOR: 1.48;
95% CI: 1.02-2.16) associated with pets in the home during pregnancy in

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

185

a cohort of 501 children from the Polish Mother and Child Cohort Study
(REPRO_PL cohort) (Stelmach et al., 2014).
Two studies from the HealthNuts cohort, a prospective, populationbased cohort of 5,276 infants age 12 months in Melbourne, Australia,
investigated whether direct exposure to pets (Koplin et al., 2012a; Peters
et al., 2015) or the co-incidence of eczema (Martin et al., 2015) moderated
the effect of pets on food allergy risk. Koplin et al. examined the relation­
ship between environmental and demographic factors and egg allergy, the
most common food allergy in infants and young children (Koplin et al.,
2012a). Using SPT to egg white and oral food challenge at 12 months
revealed that children with a pet dog at home (dog ownership ascertained
by questionnaire) were less likely to develop egg allergy than those without
a pet dog at home (aOR: 0.72; 95% CI: 0.52-0.99). Peters et al. observed
that, compared to not having a dog in the home, having a dog significantly
reduced the risk of multiple food allergies (including peanut) by 60 percent
(aOR: 0.4; 95% CI: 0.21-0.73), whereas having a dog that was kept out­
side only (versus no dog) provided no protection. In this latter scenario, a
significantly increased risk in egg allergy was actually observed (aOR: 1.56;
95% CI: 1.1-2.21) (Peters et al., 2015). Within the same cohort, Martin et
al. compared the effect of dog or cat exposure on infants with (N=2,795)
or without (N=1,903) eczema (Martin et al., 2015). Having a dog reduced
the risk of food allergy in infants with eczema (aOR: 0.7; 95% CI: 0.5-0.9),
but not in infants without eczema. A similar effect on food allergies was
observed for infants with (aOR: 0.6; 95% CI: 0.4-0.9) or without eczema
in homes with cats (Martin et al., 2015).
Results from studies exploring the relationship between animal expo­
sures and food allergies are inconsistent. The few observational studies
related to living on a farm found that exposure to farm animals offers no
protection against food allergies. Also, from observational studies, the com­
mittee concludes that evidence is limited regarding the potential for a close
interaction with a pet being more protective against a food allergy than
pet ownership in general or having a pet who is restricted to outside the
home. Further studies should be conducted on the nature of the association
between exposure to farm animals or pet ownership and food allergies.
Allergen Avoidance Hypothesis
As mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, in considering the
risk determinants for developing food allergies, the committee focused on
the prenatal and early childhood developmental periods. In that vein, this
section focuses on allergen exposure beginning at conception. The aller­
gen avoidance hypothesis was predicated on the basis of the concept that

186

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

avoiding common food allergens early in life when the immune system is
developing would prevent the onset of food allergies.
Exposure to Antigen Through Maternal Diet During Pregnancy or
Lactation
Maternal diet during pregnancy and lactation has been of great inter­
est in understanding the etiology of food allergies in offspring. The fetal
programming hypothesis supports the idea that the maternal diet has long­
term influence on children’s health (Barker, 1990; Langley-Evans, 1997).
Its application to food allergies would suggest that consuming specific
allergenic foods during this critical period might be associated with the
development of the immune system in utero that may later manifest itself
as food allergies over the life course, given specific childhood exposures.
Results from two prospective cohort studies (Bunyavanich et al., 2014;
Frazier et al., 2014) (total N=9,482 mother–child pairs) show that a higher
consumption of allergenic foods before or during pregnancy (e.g., peanut),
as measured by a food frequency questionnaire, was associated with a
reduced risk of having a child with food allergies. This finding supports
the fetal programming hypothesis. The HealthNuts Study also assessed
the role of allergen avoidance in pregnancy and lactation and the risk
of challenge-proven egg allergy and found no association (Koplin et al.,
2010). Another recent prospective cohort study (Pele et al., 2013) reported
an association between maternal pre-pregnancy consumption of shellfish
and food allergy (1.62; 95% CI: 1.11-2.37). However, this study assessed
food allergy by parental report. Randomized studies on this subject have
involved the elimination of certain allergenic foods as opposed to increasing
their consumption among primarily high-risk families. Kramer and Kakuma
conducted a high-quality systematic review that included three RCTs of
foods avoided during pregnancy and/or lactation and the outcomes of egg
and milk sensitization (but not food allergy itself) among women at high
risk of having an atopic offspring (Kramer and Kakuma, 2012). In two of
the RCTs (Falth-Mangnusson and Kjellman, 1987; Lilja et al., 1988) (total
N=334), women either avoided or decreased their intake of cow milk and
eggs beginning in the third trimester of pregnancy and this was associated
with a nonsignificant reduction of egg sensitization in their infants at 6
months, but not at 18 months. Sensitization for cow milk allergy was not
reduced at either time point. The remaining RCT (Appelt et al., 2004) (total
N=497) had women totally avoid peanuts, nuts, and fish as well as decrease
their intake of cow milk and eggs beginning in the third trimester through
1 year postpartum. This study found no significant associations with milk
or peanut sensitization in offspring at age 1, 2, or 7 years. However, for egg
sensitization, an increased risk was seen at age 2 years only (1.91; 95% CI:

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

187

1.03-3.5). This trial is published in abstract form only, with no details on
the randomization being available.
Another recent systematic review by de Silva et al. found seven highquality studies on maternal diets and also concluded that “overall, the evi­
dence is not strong enough to recommend changing the diet or supplements
of pregnant or breastfeeding women” to prevent food allergies in infants at
normal or high risk of food allergies (de Silva et al., 2014).
The committee concludes that, to date, study findings provide limited
evidence to support or discourage eliminating allergenic foods from the diet
of pregnant or lactating women at high risk of having a child with allergies.
Because the evidence about the benefits of consuming or eliminating aller­
genic foods during pregnancy and lactation is not clear, additional RCTs
are warranted before providing advice in this regard. Studies exploring the
effect on the development of food allergies in children of intake of allergens
by the mother are in progress.
Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding is an important early life factor that determines an indi­
vidual’s gut microbiota and likely indirectly modulates immune responses.
In addition, breastfeeding transfers bioactive compounds from the mother
to the child that can also influence immune responses. However, the evi­
dence assessing any potential link between breastfeeding and food allergies
risk is not clear. Systematic analysis of observational studies on the protec­
tive effect of breastfeeding have shown conflicting results, and many of
the studies included were conducted decades ago when food allergy was
uncommon and methods of assessment were limited (Grimshaw et al.,
2009). Most systematic reviews have failed to find a specific beneficial effect
of breastfeeding on food allergy or food sensitization (de Silva et al., 2014;
Kramer and Kakuma, 2012). Moreover, two cohort studies reviewed in de
Silva et al. (2014) suggested that exclusive breastfeeding for 8 weeks did not
reduce the risk of cow milk allergy (measured by parents report followed
by SPT and oral food challenge) (Saarinen et al., 1999) and breastfeeding
for 5 months or more may increase the likelihood of sensitization to egg in
infants at high risk of atopy, although food allergy was not assessed (Wetzig
et al., 2000). Importantly, the apparent negative effects of extensive breast­
feeding may relate to the delayed introduction of first complementary foods
rather than the effects of breast milk per se (see the section “Dual Allergen
Exposure Hypotheses” in this chapter). Alternatively, these recent findings
of increased risk of breastfeeding may simply be a misinterpretation of the
data related to the reverse causation phenomenon (see the section “Meth­
odological Limitations” in this chapter). One study found that the effects

188

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

of breastfeeding on food sensitization can be modified by genetic variants
relevant to allergic diseases (Hong et al., 2011).
Lodge et al. undertook a systematic review to assess the role of breast­
feeding in food allergy (Lodge et al., 2015). The review included nine cohort
and four cross-sectional studies. The numbers of participants ranged from
163 to 21,766 (cohort studies) and from 1,278 to 13,110 (cross-sectional
studies). No association with food allergy was found for more versus
less9 breastfeeding in the pooled estimate (6 cohort and 6 cross-sectional),
although study heterogeneity was high. Various sub-analyses failed to find
any protective association of breastfeeding for food allergy. The primary
issue concerning the quality of these studies was the poor accuracy of
outcome assessment. Only two studies used OFCs, the recognized gold
standard for food allergy diagnosis; most studies relied on parental report
of symptoms or on physician diagnosis.
The committee’s review of the evidence found eight studies (seven cohort
and one cross-sectional) that explored breastfeeding as a food allergy risk
determinant. Although Ivakhnenko and Nyankovskyy showed that infants
(N=240) who were breastfed had significant risk of developing an allergy
to cow milk protein and had gastrointestinal symptoms of food allergy by
age 18 months compared with those who were fed standard infant formula,
the risk of bias of this trial was high due to unclear definitions and diag­
noses of food allergy outcomes and high dropout rates (Ivakhnenko and
Nyankovskyy, 2013). Two studies performed only unadjusted analyses so
the results (mostly no significant associations) are likely to be confounded
(Grimshaw et al., 2014; McGowan et al., 2015). The other four cohort
studies showed associations between longer duration of breastfeeding (any
or exclusive) and a lower risk of developing cow milk sensitization (Liao et
al., 2014; N=258), food allergy (Stelmach et al., 2014; N=501; aOR: 0.88;
95% CI: 0.82-0.95), or multiple food allergy (predominantly egg) (Peters
et al., 2015; N=5276; aOR: 1.17; 95% CI: 1.09-1.24) after adjusting for
potential confounders. The single cross-sectional study did not find a signifi­
cant association between exclusive breastfeeding (poorly defined) and food
allergies among children (N=386) ages 0 to 18 years with atopic dermatitis.
Luccioli et al. collected data from prospective cohort of children (N=1,363)
who participated in the Infant Feeding Practices Study (IFPS) II and also
found no significant relationship between breastfeeding for various periods
and food allergies (Luccioli et al., 2014). Only some studies used OFC as
an outcome measure (Grimshaw et al., 2014; Peters et al., 2015). The single
9 More or Less: The authors included all studies. When multiple odds ratios were available
for a single study, the authors preferentially selected estimates for exclusive breastfeeding, then
longest duration versus shortest. When multiple ages of outcome were available, the authors
chose the oldest up to 18 years.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

189

cross-sectional study did not find a significant association between exclusive
breastfeeding (poorly defined) and food allergies among children, ages 0 to
18 years, with atopic dermatitis (Mailhol et al., 2014).
As mentioned above, investigation of the role of breastfeeding in aller­
gic disease is particularly prone to confounder bias because families who
are at high risk of allergy are more likely to breastfeed, as recommended
by some guidelines. In addition, the composition of human milk changes
from colostrum to late lactation and throughout the day, and differs from
mother to mother (Ballard and Morrow, 2013) and could therefore affect
health outcomes of the child. Compounding the difficulties in this area is
the inability to randomize to a nonbreastfeeding arm, as this would be
unethical given the many well-established benefits of breastfeeding, such as
protection against some chronic diseases, obesity, and infections.
The committee concludes that due to inconsistencies in results from
prospective studies, the evidence that breastfeeding is protective against
food allergies is limited. Strong evidence is unlikely to be forthcoming
because of the ethical inability to randomize a population to breastfeeding
alternatives. However, additional well-designed prospective research studies
in infants at low and high risk for food allergy are needed.
Types of Infant Formula
Significant interest has been expressed in the use of modified infant
formulas—especially partially hydrolyzed formulas (PHF), which include
longer cow milk peptides, and extensively hydrolyzed cow’s milk formulas
(EHF), which include di- and tri-peptides derived from cow milk protein—
as a way to avoid allergen exposure and prevent early childhood allergic
disease. As a result of demand from families with a history of allergy
seeking readily available primary prevention interventions, industry has
responded with the development of a variety of “allergy prevention” formu­
lae, and expert bodies have provided recommendations regarding their use
for preventing allergies. Some infant feeding guidelines have recommended
that hydrolyzed formula can be considered as primary prevention therapy
for some allergic diseases. In the United States, a policy statement from the
American Academy of Pediatrics indicated that in studies of infants at high
risk of atopy, modest evidence supports the delay or prevention of onset
atopic dermatitis by the use of hydrolyzed, and particularly extensively
hydrolyzed, formulas (Greer et al., 2008). In Australia, the Australasian
Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy Guidelines: Infant Feeding and
Allergy Prevention no longer recommends hydrolyzed formulas as primary
prevention therapy for allergic diseases. The guidelines now state, “Based
on a recently published review of studies (Boyle et al., 2016), no consistent
convincing evidence supports a protective role for partially hydrolyzed for­

190

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

mulas (usually labelled ‘HA’ or Hypoallergenic) or extensively hydrolyzed
formulas for the prevention of eczema, food allergy, asthma or allergic
rhinitis in infants or children” (ASCIA, 2016b).
A Cochrane review supports the use of hydrolyzed formula to prevent
allergy in high-risk infants who are unable to be completely breastfed but
not for those infants who can breastfed (Osborn and Sinn, 2006, 2009).
Critics of this Cochrane review have pointed out that it suffers from smallstudy publication bias (i.e., scarcity of small negative studies) (Lowe et
al., 2013) and thus the beneficial effect of PHF was likely overestimated.
Due to the methodological concerns and inconsistency of the findings of
the studies included in the review, the authors themselves recommend that
further larger trials be conducted. Subsequently, new evidence from a large
intervention trial of 620 high-risk infants (the Melbourne Atopic Cohort
Study) has emerged. Findings from this trial challenge the effectiveness of
PHF (Lowe et al., 2011).
The German Infant Nutritional Intervention (GINI) study was a trial
aimed at exploring the effect of hydrolyzed formulas (compared to cow
milk formula) in preventing allergic diseases in infants at high risk of atopy.
Infants (N=2,252) were randomly assigned at birth to receive partially or
extensively hydrolyzed whey formula, extensively hydrolyzed casein for­
mula, or cow milk formula as milk substitute for the first 4 months when
breastfeeding was insufficient. In a follow up until the children were age
6 years, hydrolyzed infant formulas prevented eczema and allergic mani­
festation (atopic dermatitis, food allergy, allergic urticaria, asthma, and
hay fever/allergic rhinitis) (von Berg et. al., 2008). However, subsequent
results showed little evidence of an ongoing preventive effect between the
ages of 7 and 10 years (von Berg et al., 2013a). These more recent findings
have not yet been incorporated into the Cochrane review. Likewise, the
European Academy of Allergy & Clinical Immunology (EAACI) system­
atic review included both the Cochrane review and the Melbourne Atopic
Cohort Study as well as the preliminary GINI results but did not include
the latest results from the GINI study. Therefore, their conclusion supported
the protective effect for PHF. Interestingly, the most recent findings from
the GINI study suggest that casein-predominant EHF might be expected
to have a greater biological effect than PHF because the formula is more
extensively modified (von Berg et al., 2013a,b). However, most infant feed­
ing guideline recommendations are based on the reality that PHF is both
cheaper and more palatable than EHF and therefore should be considered
instead of EHF. Additionally, in some countries EHF is only available with
a prescription, which significantly increases costs to the health care system.
Most recently, Boyle et al. conducted a systematic review and metaanalysis of studies to determine whether feeding infants with hydrolyzed
formulas reduces their risk of allergic disease (Boyle et al., 2016). Their

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

191

search yielded 37 intervention trials of more than 19,000 participants,
although few studies included in the meta-analysis were published in the
past 10 years. For the majority of studies, infants were considered to be at
high risk of allergy because a first degree relative had a history of allergic
disease. Overall, the pooled data showed no significant reduction in risk of
any food allergy in infants ages 0 to 4 years when they were fed EHF or
PHF compared to standard cow milk formula. On concluding the review,
the authors found that previous studies suffered from unclear or high risk
of bias. The review also showed evidence of conflict of interest and had
inadequate methods of randomization and treatment allocation (selection
bias). The authors recommended that international infant guidelines should
be revised to remove the recommendation that hydrolyzed formula protects
against allergic disease. In addition, a review of systematic reviews also
stated that evidence is insufficient to conclude that the use of hydrolyzed
formulas may reduce food allergy or sensitization when compared with
standard formula in children with high atopy risk, and no evidence sup­
ports hydrolyzed formulas over breast milk for prevention of food sensitiza­
tion or food allergy (Lodge et al., 2013).
The committee concludes that the studies on the effects of PHF or EHF
for preventing food allergies have methodological flaws and their findings
are inconsistent. Therefore, evidence on the effect of PHF or EHF for the
prevention of food allergies is limited. If this area were to be investigated,
high-quality RCT studies on the effects of PHF and EHF to determine
whether hydrolyzed infant formulas influence the onset of food allergies
would be needed before the use of these formulas could be recommended
for prevention.
Dual Allergen Exposure Hypothesis
The “Dual Allergen Exposure” hypothesis proposes that allergic sen­
sitization to foods may occur through exposure to low doses of allergen
through the skin due to food allergens in the environment being absorbed
through a damaged skin barrier (such as in eczema or presence of filag­
grin loss-of-function mutations). This hypothesis also proposes that oral
exposure to these allergens through consumption of allergenic foods early
in infancy, before skin sensitization, leads to lasting oral tolerance and
prevents the development of sensitization and allergy even with subsequent
skin exposure (Du Toit et al., 2016; Lack, 2012; Lack et al., 2003) (see
Figure 5-4).
Mechanistic evidence supporting this hypothesis comes from mouse
models (Strid et al., 2005). Recent studies suggest that the activation of
innate immune pathways in the skin through thymic stromal lymphopoi­
etin, an interleukin (IL)-7-like cytokine associated with atopic dermatitis

192

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

FIGURE 5-4 Dual-allergen exposure hypothesis for the pathogenesis of food al­
lergy. Allergic sensitization can result from cutaneous exposure and tolerance is
favored as a result of oral exposure to food.
NOTE: GI = gastrointestinal, Treg = T regulatory.
SOURCE: Lack, 2012. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.

and asthma, and basophil activation may play a key role in development of
food allergy secondary to cutaneous sensitization in animal models (Muto
et al., 2014; Noti et al., 2014).
Studies of human populations to date have primarily focused on peanut
allergy. One human study demonstrated that peanut allergens can be found
in the household environment and that higher exposure to environmental
peanut antigens appears to increase the risk of peanut allergy in children
with either filaggrin loss-of-function mutations or atopic dermatitis (Brough
et al., 2014).
Other contextual factors support this hypothesis. Weaning practices in
developed countries, coupled with high eczema rates may contribute to the
high prevalence of food allergy. In the Western world, eczema prevalence is
as high as 25 percent by age 1 year (Martin et al., 2013). (As noted previ­
ously, eczema frequently co-associates with food allergy, with 50 percent of
those with early onset, moderately severe eczema developing food allergy
by age 1 year [Martin et al., 2015].) This, coupled with recommendations

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

193

in the late 1990s and early 2000s to delay allergenic solids (e.g., egg until
age 24 months and peanut until age 3 years) provide the correct temporal
framework for this practice to have had a potential effect on the epidemic
(Koplin and Allen, 2013). The following section presents the evidence on
the main factors related to this hypothesis, namely skin barrier function and
timing of introduction of foods. The section also includes the results from
recent studies on introduction of diet diversity in early life.
Adequate Early Life Skin Barrier Function
It is important to note that mutations leading to filaggrin loss-of­
function appear to be equally common among individuals with asymptom­
atic food sensitization and those with true food allergy (Tan et al., 2012a),
suggesting that filaggrin confers a risk for food sensitization—the first step
to food allergy—but not for food allergy itself. Previous studies reporting
an association with food allergy were not designed to untangle any differ­
ential effect between sensitized tolerant and sensitized allergic individuals
(Brown et al., 2011). Recent data from the Isle of Wight birth cohort used
path analysis to demonstrate that the effect of filaggrin loss-of-function
mutations on food allergy at age 10 years occurred indirectly through an
effect on eczema and food sensitization in early childhood (Venkataraman
et al., 2014). Together, these findings suggest that skin barrier function
plays a role in sensitization status but not in food allergy or tolerance.
Two recent RCTs have investigated the application of daily moistur­
izer from birth in an attempt to reduce infantile eczema. Although the
studies are small in size, the results support the idea that the integrity
of the skin barrier is related to preventing food allergy. One RCT in the
United States and the United Kingdom (N=124) examined the effects of
an intervention that consisted of the use of an emollient at least once per
day on neonates at risk of atopic dermatitis (Simpson et al., 2014). Atopic
dermatitis was measured at 6 months. The results demonstrated a signifi­
cant protective effect against atopic dermatitis (relative risk [RR]: 0.50;
95% CI: 0.28-0.9; P=0.017). The second trial examined the effect of using
a moisturizer from the first week of life on eczema as a primary outcome
and egg sensitization (but not allergy) as a secondary outcome in a group
of 118 neonates at high risk of atopic dermatitis (Horimukai et al., 2014).
At 32 weeks postnatal age, application of moisturizer to neonates was
effective at preventing atopic dermatitis after 32 weeks, but unfortunately
the trial showed no evidence of a reduction in sensitization to egg white
in this relatively small study of 118 infants. However, a higher proportion
of infants with atopic dermatitis showed egg sensitization compared with
infants without atopic dermatitis.

194

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

The committee concludes that limited but consistent evidence on muta­
tions on the filaggrin gene and on preventing eczema at early age suggests
that impairment of skin barrier function plays a role in sensitization status
as the first step on the path to food allergy.
Timing of Introduction of Solids and Infant Feeding
The dual antigen exposure hypothesis states that the second factor in
the two steps to food allergy is the delay in oral allergen exposure. Until
recently, delayed introduction of solids and particularly allergenic solids
into the infant’s diet was a strategy adopted in many countries with the
aim of reducing or preventing food allergies. Although exclusive breastfeed­
ing for the first 6 months of life has been universally recommended in all
countries to promote its health benefits (WHO, 2016), as described above,
no evidence indicates that exclusive breastfeeding prevents the development
of food allergies.
In 2008 and 2009, specific dietary advice to avoid peanuts in the
United Kingdom and the United States, respectively, was rescinded (Greer
et al., 2008; NHS, 2015a) based largely on the premise that evidence was
insufficient to promote avoidance as a strategy to prevent food allergies.
More recent advice does not state whether infants should actively receive
allergenic foods, and if so at what age. Indeed, a recent nationwide UK
dietary survey showed that only 8 percent of children younger than age 1
year had consumed any foods containing peanut (McAndrew et al., 2012).
The EAACI systematic review includes three cohort studies that found
that the concept of delaying solid foods or cow milk consumption until 4
months of age does not appear to confer any benefit in terms of food aller­
gies (de Silva et al., 2014). Most recently, evidence has been accumulating
about the benefits of introducing allergens early. This section will focus on
the most recent RCTs that evaluate the benefits of introducing allergens
early in life.
In 2008, Du Toit et al. found that the level of peanut allergy in Jewish
children in the United Kingdom was 10-fold higher than that of Jewish chil­
dren in Israel and that median consumption of peanut protein was 0 g per
month in the United Kingdom versus 7.1 g per month in Israel10 (Du Toit
et al., 2008). Based on these results, Du Toit et al. conducted a large RCT
to formally assess whether early introduction of peanut prevented the
development of peanut allergy at age 5 years (Du Toit et al., 2015). The
LEAP (Learning Early about Peanut Allergy) study randomized 640 highly
10 At the time, it was common practice in Israel to introduce a peanut snack (Bamba) as a
weaning food into the diet of infants around the age of 4 to 6 months. In contrast, UK guide­
lines at the time recommended that children avoid peanut until after age 3 years.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

195

atopic children with severe eczema and/or egg allergy to either consump­
tion or avoidance of peanut at ages 4 to 11 months and the intervention
continued until the children were age 5 years. The results showed that early
consumption of peanut reduced the prevalence of peanut allergy (diagnosed
by DBPCOFC) at age 5 years by more than 80 percent. The reduction was
effective in children who were either SPT negative or SPT positive to peanut
(wheals of 1, 2, 3, or 4 mm). As 17 percent of the LEAP cohort had peanutspecific IgE ≥0.35 at entry into the study and 27 percent had detectable IgE
(≥0.1 kUA/L), prevention of peanut allergy was occurring for the majority
of children after IgE sensitization had occurred; this represents secondary
prevention (Du Toit et al., 2013). However, for infants in the group who
were SPT negative at enrollment and who had no detectable IgE, early con­
sumption of peanut also reduced the prevalence of peanut allergy (6 percent
and 1 percent in the peanut avoidance group and in the peanut consuming
group, respectively). This primary prevention strategy also was effective in
a secondary analysis in children of different races.
As reviewed in Chapter 4, at the moment, we do not have definitive
biomarkers to define tolerance. It is of interest that during the LEAP study,
an early rise in peanut-specific IgG4 and peanut-specific IgG4/IgE ratio
occurred in the peanut-consuming group (Du Toit et al., 2015). A high
peanut-specific IgG4/IgE ratio was associated with protection against pea­
nut allergy. Although the peanut-specific IgG4/IgE ratio decreased in the
original peanut-consuming group during the period of peanut avoidance in
the follow-up LEAP-On Study (Du Toit et al., 2016), it remained signifi­
cantly higher than in the original peanut avoidance group. Interestingly in
LEAP, peanut-specific IgE was not significantly different between the origi­
nal peanut consuming and peanut avoidance groups throughout the study.
However, peanut-specific IgE to Ara h 2 started to decline in the original
peanut consuming group after 2.5 years of consumption, and continued to
decline despite 1 year of peanut avoidance in that group between ages 5 and
6 years (Du Toit et al., 2016). This suggests potentially that high production
of allergen-specific IgG4 may be important in the initiation of tolerance and
that inhibition of IgE synthesis may be important in long-lived tolerance.
In order to determine whether early introduction of peanut was effective
at preventing peanut allergy in the absence of ongoing peanut consumption,
the LEAP-On Study was designed (Du Toit et al., 2016). Children (N=566)
from the original LEAP cohort, irrespective of whether they were in the
original peanut consumer or avoidant group, were asked to completely
avoid peanut consumption for 1 year and then their peanut allergy status
was determined by OFC, SPT, and specific IgE. Despite high adherence
to this protocol of avoidance, the protective effects of early consumption
remained and the original peanut consuming group had a 74 percent reduc­
tion in peanut allergy at age 6 years compared to the original peanut avoid­

196

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

ant group. Another follow-up study, the LEAP Adlib Study, is currently
being designed. In this trial the original LEAP participants will continue to
be followed up for a 4-year period of ad libitum consumption of peanut
to determine whether the effects of early introduction remain protective.
In regard to other foods, observational studies suggest that delayed
introduction of egg (Koplin et al., 2010), cow milk (Katz et al., 2010), and
wheat (Poole et al., 2006) are associated with an increased risk of those
respective food allergies. Various trials are in progress to confirm or refute
these observations (see Table 5-1). Early evidence from Koplin and Allen
(2013, p. 830) “suggests that if a window of opportunity for promoting
tolerance exists, it may be different for each food” (Koplin and Allen, 2013,
p. 830). However, further investigation is required. In the large HealthNuts
study, where egg allergy was determined by challenge (among other food
allergens), it was found that early introduction (age 4 to 6 months) of hen
egg in the infant’s diet protected against the development of egg allergy,
but introduction after 6 months of age was associated with significantly
increased risk of developing egg allergy and even more so if introduced
after age 9 months (Koplin et al., 2010). The results from the LEAP study
(Du Toit et al., 2015) also are supported by data from the Solids Timing for
Allergy Research (STAR) trial, which randomized 86 infants with eczema
to egg avoidance or early regular egg consumption from age 4 months. The
study found a lower, nonsignificant prevalence of egg allergy by 12 months
in the intervention group (33% versus 51%; P=0.11) (Palmer et al., 2013).
In a large birth cohort study conducted in Israel, IgE-mediated cow milk
allergy did not occur in infants (N=13,019) who had received cow milk–
based formula regularly in the first 2 weeks of life. In contrast, children who
had formula milk introduced at age 3 to 4 months had the highest rate of
cow milk allergy (Katz et al., 2010).
The EAT (Enquiring about Tolerance) intervention trial, which has
recently been published, also examined the effects of early introduction of
common allergenic foods. Unfortunately, compliance with intervention in
this trial was low and the intention to treat analysis did not reveal a protec­
tive effect from early introduction of solids. In contrast, the per protocol
analysis did suggest that early introduction of other common allergenic
foods into the diet of infants may protect against the development of food
allergies in general (Perkin et al., 2016). In the EAT study, exclusively
breastfed infants (N=1,303) were recruited in the general population and
randomly assigned at age 3 months to either introduction of six allergenic
foods (cooked egg, peanut, cow milk, sesame, white fish, and wheat) (Early
Introduction Group) or to the current recommended practice of exclusive
breastfeeding until approximately 6 months of age (Standard Introduction
Group). The primary outcome was determined to be food allergy between
1 and 3 years of age determined in nearly all participants by DBPCOFC.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

197

The study showed a modest and nonsignificant 20 percent overall decrease
in the rate of food allergies in the Early Introduction Group (5.6 percent
compared to 7.1 percent in the Standard Introduction Group). However, in
a per protocol analysis, the prevalence of any food allergy was significantly
lower in the Early Introduction Group compared to the Standard Intro­
duction Group (2.4 percent versus 7.3 percent; P=0.01) representing a 66
percent reduction in the prevalence of overall food allergy. The effects were
most apparent for peanut allergy in the per protocol analysis (0 percent in
the Early Introduction Group versus 2.5 percent in the Standard Introduc­
tion Group; P=0.003) and for egg allergy (1.4 percent versus 5.5 percent;
P=0.009). These changes also were accompanied by decreases in SPT to the
foods in the Early Introduction Group. A dose–response analysis revealed
that 2 g of peanut protein or egg white protein per week appeared to be
most protective against these food allergies. Interestingly 2 g of peanut
protein per week is the dose that was observed in the Du Toit et al. study
in Israel where children appeared to be protected against peanut allergy
(Du Toit et al., 2008).
The EAT study shows that early introduction of foods was safe, as the
intervention group did not experience an increased number of reactions
compared to the controls. However, it is difficult to make any certain
conclusions from the EAT study about the efficacy of early introduction of
foods, given that efficacy was seen only in the per protocol group. Although
careful analysis did not show any evidence of bias that could account for
these results, it is not possible to completely exclude unmeasured bias.
A number of factors appeared to be associated with nonadherence to
early introduction of foods relating to atopic predisposition. These include
ethnicity, family life, readiness to eat solid foods, and parental perception
of possible food allergic reactions (IgE- or non-IgE-mediated). The EAT
study therefore suggests that if early introduction of allergenic foods from 3
months of age is to be adopted as a prevention strategy, numerous potential
obstacles must be overcome with respect to implementation of adherence.
Importantly, early introduction of allergens in the LEAP study or the EAT
study did not reduce duration of breastfeeding (Feeney et al., 2016). It is
noteworthy, however, that the participants in the EAT study are from the
general population rather than a high-risk population and therefore any
effect size may be less pronounced compared to the LEAP study. Further­
more, the intervention was more complex because it involved six foods,
not one.
Diet diversity Two studies have examined the role of diversity of early
life food exposures, which may be one factor that coincides temporally
with the rise in food allergy, in the development of food sensitization and
food allergy. A prospective birth cohort study of 856 children found that

198

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

increased diversity of complementary foods introduced in the first year of
life was associated with a reduced risk of food allergy (Roduit et al., 2014).
In another prospective longitudinal study of 123 participants, the authors
found that dietary patterns in the first year of life consisting of more fresh
fruit and vegetables and home-prepared meals were associated with less
challenge-proven food allergy by the age of 2 years (Grimshaw et al., 2014).
The committee concludes that results of the LEAP trial provide strong
evidence that early introduction of peanut (between 4 and 11 months) is
protective against peanut allergy in infants who are at high risk (as defined
by early onset eczema or coexistent egg allergy). Limited evidence from
observational studies also suggests that delaying the introduction of egg,
cow milk, and wheat to decrease risk of those food allergies has no ben­
efits. Results from one RCT show a not significant decrease in food allergy
if allergenic foods (i.e., cooked egg, peanut, cow milk, sesame, white fish,
and wheat) are introduced starting at 3 months of age. More studies are
necessary to assess whether early introduction of other allergenic foods, in
addition to peanut, affect food allergy.
Nutritional Immunomodulation Hypothesis
Proper functioning of the immune system is crucial to health, and diet
is a major and common exogenous factor modulating immunocompetence.
Thus, nutrition research has focused on the role of foods or specific food
components in enhancing immune system responsiveness to challenges
and thus improving health and reducing disease risks (Albers et al., 2005).
Along these lines, evidence supports the notion that sensitization or expres­
sion of food allergies does not depend exclusively on the food allergens per
se, but on the exposure to other immunomodulatory exposures, such as
other dietary factors, during specific critical periods. This section provides
an overview of the immunomodulatory capacities of selected food compo­
nents, including vitamin D, selected fatty acids, and folate. Better knowl­
edge of these interactions should provide additional avenues for preventing
and/or ameliorating food allergies.
Vitamin D
Vitamin D has become increasingly recognized as an important regu­
lator of immune response (Adams and Hewison, 2008). 1,25(OH)2D can
be converted from 25(OH)D locally based on widespread expression of
vitamin D activating enzyme CP27B in a broad spectrum of cells involved
in immune response, such as macrophages, B cells, and T cells. This active
form of vitamin D exerts its function through interaction with the vitamin
D receptor (VDR), which is also present in the above immune cells. Vitamin

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

199

D has been demonstrated to inhibit the differentiation of B lymphocytes to
plasma cells and suppress immunoglobulin production (Chen et al., 2007).
However, the effects of vitamin D on T lymphocytes are more complicated.
Vitamin D has been shown to inhibit T cell proliferation and production
of Th1 cytokines, which induces a shift in the balance between Th1 and
Th2-type cytokines toward Th2 dominance (Cantorna et al., 2004; Iho et
al., 1985; Reichel et al., 1987). In contrast, in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells from
human cord blood, vitamin D inhibits IL-12-generated interferon (IFN)-γ
production and IL-4 production, as well as IL-4-induced expression of
IL-13.
It has been hypothesized that in the presence of vitamin D, T regulatory
cells function normally to suppress inappropriate Th1 and Th2 responses
to environmental exposures leading to disease (Litonjua and Weiss, 2007).
Research suggests that vitamin D deficiency might impair epithelial barrier
integrity, which would in turn result in increased and inappropriate mucosal
exposure to food antigens and also a pro-sensitization immune imbalance
that compromises immunological tolerance (Roider et al., 2013).
Two opposing hypotheses have been proposed regarding the connec­
tion between vitamin D and allergic disease in general. In 1999, Wjst pos­
tulated that excess vitamin D might be associated with an increased risk
of allergic disease based on its effects on the shift in the T-cell phenotype
from a balance on Th1/Th2 to aTh2 dominance, and parallel patterns
of increased oral vitamin D supplementation with a “Western lifestyle”
(Wjst, 2008; Wjst and Dold, 1999). In contrast, Litonjua and Weiss raised
an opposite hypothesis, suggesting that vitamin D might protect against
asthma and allergies (Litonjua and Weiss, 2007, 2008). They believed that
the immune effects of vitamin D are probably found on dendritic cells
and Treg cells, and that these effects may differ depending on the stage of
human development.
Two lines of ecological enquiry support the more recent hypothesis
that low vitamin D may increase the risk of food allergy. First, countries
further from the Equator (and thus receiving lower ambient ultraviolet
radiation) have recorded more pediatric admissions to the hospital for
food allergy–related events, and more prescriptions of hypoallergenic for­
mulas for the treatment of cow milk allergy and adrenaline auto injectors
for the treatment of anaphylaxis in children, compared to countries closer
to the Equator (Camargo et al., 2007; Mullins et al., 2009, 2010; Rud­
ders et al., 2010). These findings appear to be independent of longitude,
socioeconomic status, or physician density. Second, children receiving
care at a large medical center in Boston for food-related acute allergic
reactions were more likely to be born in autumn/winter than in spring/
summer (Vassallo et al., 2010). Similar relationships of food allergy to
birth seasonality have been reported in the Southern hemisphere (Mullins

200

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

et al., 2011). Furthermore, children residing in Australia’s southern states
have twice the odds (95% CI: 1.2-5.0) of peanut allergy at age 4 to 5 years
and three times (95% CI: 1.0-9.0) the odds of egg allergy than children in
the northern states (Osborne et al., 2012). A recent study from Australia
described that infants with vitamin D insufficiency were three times more
likely to have egg allergy than those who had adequate stores of the vita­
min, with the odds increasing to 10-fold among those with two or more
food allergies. Furthermore, among food-sensitized infants, those with
vitamin D insufficiency were six times more likely to be food allergic than
tolerant (Allen et al., 2013). These effects were observed among infants
with Australian-born parents but not those with parents born outside Aus­
tralia. Genetic polymorphisms contribute to variation in vitamin D binding
protein levels, explaining almost 80 percent of variation in levels (Koplin
et al., 2016). Binding protein levels in turn alter the biological availability
of serum vitamin D, with lower levels increasing the availability of serum
vitamin D (25OHD3). It was recently described that polymorphisms result­
ing in lower VDR levels appeared to compensate for adverse effects of low
serum vitamin D on food allergy risk (Koplin et al., 2016), presumably
by increasing the ability to use available vitamin D. These findings suggest
that references ranges for optimal levels of serum vitamin D may need to
take into account differences in VDR level.
A few studies have been published on the effect of maternal vitamin D
status during pregnancy and the development of food allergy in offspring.
A follow-up study from an RCT (N=164) reported that Vitamin D supple­
mentation of the mothers during lactation may increase the risk of later
food allergy up to 2 years of age (unadjusted analysis), although the authors
reported high loss in subjects in the follow-up (Norizoe et al., 2014). How­
ever, results from cross-sectional studies (Allen et al., 2013) suggest that
vitamin D sufficiency in infants age 1 year may be an important protective
factor for food allergy at that age. Another cross-sectional study that fol­
lowed a German birth cohort for 10 years reported that specific IgE for
food allergens (OR: 1.07; 95% CI: 1.02-1.11) at age 10, as well as lifetime
prevalence were significantly related to the vitamin D status (Wawro et
al., 2014). Conversely, a study in Korea (N=226) showed that vitamin D
deficiency increased the risk of sensitization to food allergens (Baek et al.,
2014). In a longitudinal study (N=231), Jones et al. showed that maternal
intake of supplemental vitamin D was significantly correlated with cord
blood 25(OH)D3 concentration (Jones et al., 2012). However, the associa­
tions between cord blood 25(OH)D3 concentration and allergen sensitiza­
tion, IgE-mediated food allergy, or eczema severity were not significant.
Another prospective birth cohort study (N=378) in Germany reported
that maternal and cord blood 25(OH)D3 was positively associated with

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

201

children’s risk for food allergy within the first 2 years of life (Weisse et al.,
2013).
Liu et al. reported that the combination of persistently low vitamin D
status at birth and in early childhood (ages 1 to 3 years) increased the risk
of food sensitization (defined as specific IgE ≥0.35 kUA/L to any common
food allergen, that is, egg white, milk, peanut, walnut, soy, shrimp, cod
fish, and wheat) (aOR: 2.03; 95% CI: 1.02-4.04); the risk was particularly
higher among children carrying the C allele of rs2243250 (aOR: 3.23; 95%
CI: 1.37-7.60) (N=460) (Liu et al., 2013).
Multiple genes are known to be involved in 25(OH)D3 metabolism
and regulatory pathways: genes encoding the molecules to convert 25(OH)
D3 into its bioactive form 1,25(OH)2D (i.e., CYP27B1) and then a watersoluble metabolite (i.e., calcitroic acid; CYP24A1), as well as the receptor
complex of vitamin D (i.e., VDR, RXRA, RXRB) and vitamin D binding
protein (i.e., GC). Liu et al. evaluated children in the Boston Birth Cohort
(N=649) and did not find an association between vitamin D levels in cord
blood and sensitization to food allergens in early childhood (Liu et al.,
2011). However, when examined with candidate gene single nucleotide
polymorphisms, a significant interaction was identified for an IL-4 gene
polymorphism and three other genes, indicating a risk for sensitization.
In an Australian study, Koplin et al. investigated whether polymorphisms
in a VDR-binding protein gene (low, the GT/TT genotype; high, the GG
genotype) could modify the relationship between serum vitamin D and food
allergy (Koplin et al., 2016). The study (N=5,276) found that low serum
25(OH)D3 levels (≤50 nM/L) at age 1 year had a modest association with
food allergy, particularly among infants with the GG genotype (aOR: 6.0;
95% CI: 0.9-38.9) but the CI was wide. There was no association with food
allergy in children with those with low serum 25(OH)D3 levels and GT/TT
genotypes (aOR: 0.7; 95% CI: 0.2-2.0; P interaction=0.014).
The committee concludes that the quantity of evidence on the role of
vitamin D in the development of food allergy during critical developmental
windows (in utero, infancy, and early childhood) is limited. Further research
is needed to confirm or refute this relationship.
Lipids/Omega-3 Fatty Acids
Dietary fat consumption has been hypothesized to influence atopy
development by modulation of IgE production (Black and Sharpe, 1997).
Among the different dietary fats, the ones that have been studied most
extensively are the omega-3 fatty acids. Omega-3 fatty acids are known
to have anti-inflammatory and immune modulator properties (Wall et al.,
2010). Current evidence suggests that the intake of omega-3 fatty acids has
decreased from ancestral times, whereas the consumption of omega-6 has

202

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

probably increased. Consequently, the dietary ratios of omega-6 to omega-3
fatty acids have changed over time from approximately 1:1 to almost 17:1
in certain industrialized societies (Simopoulos, 2002). The parallel increases
in this ratio and in the prevalence of allergic disease, as well as informa­
tion from experimental models, have elicited the hypothesis that dietary
omega-3 fatty acids in early life may influence immune system development
and immune cell function (Calder, 2013; Shek et al., 2012).
This hypothesis has been tested using a variety of experimental models,
and the results of individual studies have been the focus of several reviews
and meta-analyses that reveal the uncertainties that currently afflict this
area of knowledge. Contributing to the current controversies are (1) the
different experimental designs (observational versus RCTs), (2) the times
of intervention and follow up, (3) the usually small size of the populations
studied, (4) the different approaches to supplying the omega-3 fatty acids
and the doses used, (5) the different periods investigated (fetal life, infancy,
childhood), (6) the different outcomes examined, and (7) the potential
confounder introduced by the wide-ranging presence of pro-allergenic pol­
lutants and contaminants in fish, the major source of dietary omega-3.
The systematic review of Klemens et al., which reviewed the literature
from 1950-2010, is considered to be of medium quality (Klemens et al.,
2011). The review included three RCTs (Dunstan et al., 2003; Furuhjelm
et al., 2009; Lauritzen et al., 2005; total N=264) of omega-3 fatty acids
supplementation compared to olive or soy oil during pregnancy and/or
lactation in a high-risk population for outcomes of food allergy, as defined
by SPT and clinical diagnosis. When supplementation started during preg­
nancy egg sensitization decreased at 12 months of age (OR: 0.33; 95% CI:
0.16-0.70). Receiving the supplementation during pregnancy and/or lacta­
tion and food allergy at age 12 months were not significantly associated.
A recent Cochrane review, which included manuscripts published until
August 2014, assessed the effect of omega-3 supplementation in pregnant
and/or breastfeeding women on allergy outcomes (food allergy, atopic der­
matitis, allergic rhinitis, and asthma/wheeze) in their children (Gunaratne
et al., 2015). Overall, the results showed little reduction of allergic disease
in the children resulting from maternal omega-3 supplementation during
pregnancy and/or breastfeeding. Five trials reported food allergy outcomes
(Dunstan et al., 2003; Furuhjelm et al., 2009; Lauritzen et al., 2005;
Makrides et al., 2009, 2010). There was only one study where omega-3
supplementation reduced the incidence of IgE-mediated food allergies in
children up to 12 months of age (Furuhjelm et al., 2009) (N=117; RR: 0.13;
95% CI: 0.02-0.95). Similarly, another recent review identified three RCTs
(Dunstan et al., 2003; Furuhjelm et al., 2009; Palmer et al., 2012) and two
follow-up studies (Furuhjelm et al., 2011; Palmer et al., 2013) with preg­
nant women whose infants were at high risk of atopy. After adjusting for

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

203

potential confounders or after long-term follow-up only one study showed
an association between maternal omega-3 fatty acid supplementation and
lower risk of food sensitization (Newberry et al., 2016).
The committee concludes that the current evidence does not support a
link between increased maternal omega-3 intake and a protective effect on
childhood food allergy.
Folate
Emerging interest in the role of folate in immune development and
allergic disease has been driven by the recent understanding that folate, a
dietary methyl donor, can affect immune function and alter gene expression
through epigenetic mechanisms (Brown et al., 2014). Concerns have been
raised about whether folic acid supplementation during pregnancy and/
or early childhood is a potential risk factor for the development of atopic
diseases in children. As animal models have demonstrated, maternal supple­
mentation with dietary methyl donors during pregnancy induces hyper­
methylation of key regulatory genes in lung tissue, resulting in subsequent
allergic airway disease in offspring (Hollingsworth et al., 2008). Exposure
to folate in utero can affect DNA methylation during fetal development in
humans (Amarasekera et al., 2014), which can influence transcriptional
activity. For example, hypermethylation can silence the expression of genes.
During polarization of naive T helper cells to Th2 cells, methylation of the
promoter region of the IFN-γ gene blocks transcription factor binding and
thus expression of the IFN-γ gene (Jones and Chen, 2006). Consequently,
increased folic acid intake could influence the expression of genes that may
be involved in T-cell differentiation during gestation. In turn, this may influ­
ence the allergic predisposition in the neonate.
To date, most human studies on this topic have focused on asthma,
with very limited number of studies specific to food allergy or food sensi­
tization. An Australian study (N=484) assessed maternal folic acid intake
and serum folate levels during the third trimester, and cord blood folate
status at birth (N=285), and allergic outcomes at age 12 months, including
IgE-mediated food allergy, eczema, and asthma, in offspring (Dunstan et
al., 2012, p. 51). In their study, food allergy was defined as “a history of
immediate symptoms following contact and/or ingestion and a positive SPT
to the implicated food.”
However, maternal serum folate status and allergic outcomes were
not associated (Dunstan et al., 2012). In a study of 2,834 Dutch children,
maternal folic acid supplement intake across the whole pregnancy, and
intracellular folate status (measured in the third trimester of pregnancy in
837 [29.5%] participants) was not significantly associated with specific

204

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

IgE against hen egg, cow milk, peanut, and aeroallergens at age 2 years or
eczema until age 6 to 7 years (Magdelijns et al., 2011).
A recent study that measured serum folate (at ages 2, 4, 6, and 8
years) in 138 U.S. children found that increased serum folate levels at or
before age 6 years were significantly associated with increased incidence
of sensitization to both food and aeroallergens, but not with serum total
IgE, asthma, or wheezing at ages 6 or 9 years (Okupa et al., 2013). In the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) (which
covers ages 2 to 85 years), a cross-sectional study, serum folate levels
were inversely associated with atopy, wheeze, and elevated total IgE levels
(Matsui and Matsui, 2009).
Of note, the inconsistent results of previous studies are likely due
to many reasons, including differences in sample size, participants’ ages,
clinical characteristics, allergic outcomes, methods used for measurement
of folate status, and statistical methods used in the analysis.
The committee concludes that evidence to assess the causal association
between folate and the development or prevention of food allergy is lacking.
Further research to study this potential association is needed.
Other Nutrients
A prospective cohort study assessed the relationship between maternal
dietary antioxidant intake (B carotene, vitamins C and E, copper, and zinc)
during pregnancy and food allergy of the child at age 12 months among
families at high risk (West et al., 2012). This study of 300 mother-infant
dyads found a protective effect of vitamin C intake on food allergy, with
higher intakes that were limited to one quartile of vitamin C intake. For
copper, intake in the highest quartile also showed a protective effect. How­
ever, as previously noted, observational studies suffer from inherent meth­
odological flaws. Thus, proper RCTs are required to determine the causal
effect of the maternal diet on the etiology of food allergies in offspring.
The committee concludes that evidence to assess the causal association
between other nutrients and the development or prevention of food allergy
is lacking.
Other Hypotheses
Do the Obesity and Diabetes Epidemics Have a Role in the Rise of Food
Allergy?
The parallel increase in the prevalence of obesity and type 2 diabe­
tes and allergic diseases raises the question of whether these conditions
may be linked. Obesity is known to induce systemic inflammation, which

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

205

might adversely influence the immature immune system and atopic out­
comes. Increased adipose tissue also could lead to reduced adiponectin
levels, which in turn down-regulates the secretion of IL-10 and decreases
regulatory T cells (Hersoug and Linneberg, 2007). Although the precise
mechanism underlying the link between obesity and allergic disease includ­
ing food allergies remains to be elucidated, the hypothesis is biologically
plausible.
Very limited data are available on the association between having
overweight or obesity and food allergy. Observational studies have shown
that obesity is associated with a higher risk of atopy (elevated specific IgE
to allergen) (Ouyang et al., 2009; Visness et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2000). For
example, data from the 2005-2006 NHANES demonstrated that children
with overweight or obesity had a higher geometric mean of total IgE levels
and were at a higher risk of atopy than children with normal weight. This
association was driven largely by allergic sensitization to food allergens,
and systemic inflammation (measured as serum c-reactive protein) in chil­
dren with obesity may play a role in the development of allergy (Visness et
al., 2009). In contrast, ample studies show the association between over­
weight and obesity and asthma in both children and adults (Baumann and
Lorentz, 2013; Granell et al., 2014).
The role of maternal overweight and obesity and diabetes on the
developing fetus and the subsequent risk of allergic diseases has not been
well studied but deserve attention. In the prospective Boston Birth cohort,
Kumar et al. reported that in term births, gestational diabetes was sig­
nificantly associated with allergen sensitization in the child, and such
association was also driven by food sensitization (Kumar et al., 2009). In
contrast, others reported no associations between obesity measures and
atopy (Jarvis et al., 2002; Ma et al., 2010), or inverse associations (Van
Gysel et al., 2009).
Other Unsubstantiated Hypothesis for the Rise in Food Allergy
Media interest in food allergies has become significant and sustained
as food allergies have become more common. As such, public conjectures
about potential causes for the rise are widespread. In particular, awareness
about unfortunate cases of food-induced anaphylaxis is high. Added to that
is the increased awareness by various community or commercial organiza­
tions (such as schools, restaurants, airlines, and sporting clubs) of their need
to be careful about how they provide foods for food allergic individuals. As
a result, communities are greatly interested in why the prevalence of food
allergy appears to be rising.
One of the most widely held theories, among the many that abound,
as to why food allergy is on the rise holds that it is due to the increasing

206

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

consumption of processed foods and food additives. Unfortunately, to date
no significant research has been conducted on this issue. Websites and blogs
tout the dangers of processed foods and food additives, and evidence from
clinical observation suggests that some parents believe that food additives
aggravate a range of clinical symptoms and signs, from difficult behavior
and autism to gastrointestinal reactions. Clinically, the best way to under­
stand whether a food is aggravating symptoms is to eliminate that food and
later challenge with it—provided the risk of anaphylaxis has been excluded.
However, the role of additives and preservatives in the development of
food allergy in the first place has never been examined at the ecological or
epidemiological level. In addition to understanding whether preservatives
or additives have a direct toxicological effect on the developing immune
system, it would be valuable to assess whether these substances actually
influence the composition of the gastrointestinal microbiome.
Concerns over genetically modified crops (Nordlee et al., 1996) has
resulted in consideration of the role that such foods may play in aggravat­
ing food allergy and in a requirement to assess the potential allergenicity
of genetically modified crops (CAC, 2009; FAO/WHO, 2001). Although
an online tool recently has been developed to help assess the role a novel
protein may play in cross-reactivity (Goodman et al., 2016) based on crite­
ria from the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC, 2009), current meth­
odologies are considered inadequate to predict de novo allergenicity. Little
or no research exists on whether the increased use of genetically modified
crops could be linked to the rise in food allergy.
Numerous lay books and review articles argue that the increased con­
sumption of fast food in the Westernized diet may have a significant impact
on immunity (Myles, 2014). Although emerging indirect evidence suggests
that fresh fruit and vegetables and food diversity might be important for
an optimal and healthy start to life, to date little work has been done on
their role specifically in preventing food allergy. Some of the first emerg­
ing evidence of diet diversity and its impact on food allergy development
has been generated by the EuroPrevall study (Grimshaw et al., 2014). In a
nested case-control within-cohort study of 41 infants using gold standard
food challenge outcomes and 82 age-matched controls, the authors found
that an infant diet with high levels of fruits, vegetables, and home-prepared
foods is associated with less food allergy by 2 years of age. As an observa­
tional study, these results are subject to confounding but they generate a
hypothesis worth testing in systematic trials.
The committee concludes that speculation abounds regarding why
food allergy is on the rise. Although some ideas are based in appropriate
theoretical frameworks, the absence of RCTs prevents firm conclusions to
be drawn on their validity.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

207

OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
The development of food allergies, like other complex diseases, might
be regulated by the epigenome and in that way be caused by a genetic pre­
disposition interacting with environmental exposures. The epigenome can
be altered throughout the lifespan, but is particularly sensitive to environ­
mental factors during early life periods. There appears to be a window of
opportunity in the perinatal and early childhood period that may modulate
the functionality of the immune system and related health conditions, spe­
cifically food allergies.
Many factors have been postulated to contribute to the onset of sensiti­
zation and to food allergies. A few of them have been extensively researched
and sufficient evidence exists to support guidelines or to continue research
to gain more insights (e.g., about the optimal timing and dosing of early
introduction of foods). For other factors, either evidence is lacking about
their association with food allergy but the association is biologically plau­
sible (e.g., folate) or limited evidence exists about their association (e.g.,
vitamin D or fatty acids). For these, a recommendation based on their
association with food allergy development cannot be made at this time
and more research is needed. For other factors, direct or indirect evidence
is lacking, but myths continue to prevail among the public (e.g., food
additives).
For some factors (e.g., breastfeeding or vaginal delivery), although the
evidence is inconsistent, it would be unethical to pursue RCTs; therefore,
the evidence about their contribution to food allergies is derived solely
from epidemiological studies. The review of the evidence by the committee
neither confirmed nor rebutted current hypotheses related to any associa­
tion between these factors and the increase in the prevalence of food aller­
gies. The most recent research on the effects of allergen exposure at early
age, however, strongly supports the dual allergen exposure hypothesis.
The strongest data on potential prevention practices derives from a large
RCT supporting the hypothesis that delaying the introduction of peanuts,
coupled with high eczema rates, may have contributed to the high preva­
lence of peanut allergy in the Western world. Similar trials are being con­
ducted for other allergenic foods and some of them are still being analyzed
and interpreted (see Table 5-1). The LEAP study found that within a very
narrow time range (ages 4 to 11 months), early introduction of peanut is
protective against peanut allergy in infants who are at high risk (as defined
by early onset eczema or coexistent egg allergy). Other studies have found
that delaying introduction of other allergenic foods (cooked egg, cow milk,
and wheat) has no benefits.
The lack of strong evidence for a link between most of the potential risk
determinants and food allergy has created inconsistencies in public health

208

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

advice among different guidelines (see Table 5-2) and corresponding con­
fusion among physicians, patients, and their families. Consensus of infant
feeding guidelines to prevent food allergy across different public health
authorities is needed for health care providers to counsel patients and their
caregivers with consistent recommendations. Moreover, future clinical prac­
tice guidelines and public health policy should take into account the way in
which a risk factor may differentially affect the risk of disease as well as the
behavior of individuals with food allergy or their caregivers.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The committee recommends that public health authorities and clin­
ical practice guidelines include consistent, clear, and evidence-based
advice for families and health care providers, including dietitians,
about the potential benefits of introducing allergenic foods (e.g.,
peanut products, egg, dairy, and wheat) in the first year of life to
infants, when an infant is developmentally ready (around 6 months
of age), but not before 4 months of age, particularly to those at
high risk of allergy. Guidelines also should include information
about the circumstances in which health care providers should
advise their patients about the safest way to introduce in their diet
peanut products (and/or other foods, as determined by the results
of ongoing research).
In addition, as mentioned in Chapter 6, the committee recom­
mends that public health authorities regularly update food allergy
guidelines on diagnosis, prevention, and management based on
strong scientific evidence. For example, current evidence is insuffi­
cient to associate any of the following behaviors with prevention of
food allergy: food allergen avoidance diets for pregnant or lactating
women, prolonged allergen avoidance in infancy, vaginal delivery,
breastfeeding, infant formulas containing extensively or partially
hydrolyzed protein, and supplementation with specific nutrients
(e.g., vitamin D, folate, fatty acids) in children or adults.
RESEARCH NEEDS
Considerations for Study Designs
Studies on the etiological factors associated with food allergies fre­
quently present methodological flaws due to various reasons, including
lack of accounting for confounding factors (e.g., breastfeeding), use of
inaccurate food allergy measures (e.g., self-reporting), or disregard for the

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

209

fact that different populations (e.g., those at high risk of developing a food
allergy) might respond differently to the various risk factors. For example,
due to a variety of differential gene-environment factors (e.g., genetics, epi­
genetics, microbiomes, and other pre- and postnatal environmental factors),
populations will respond differently to interventions. Also, the etiology
and early life onset of food allergy seems to be multifactorial, and collect­
ing specimen for future analyses would be advantageous. Future research
design on etiological determinants should consider the following:

•
•

•
•

•

•

Conduct longitudinal birth cohort studies that explore the effects
of environmental factors during critical developmental windows (in
utero, infancy, and early childhood) on food allergy.
Couple relevant prenatal, perinatal, and early childhood epidemio­
logical and clinical data with appropriate biospecimen collections
(e.g., serum, cord blood, breast milk) for current and future bio­
marker analyses.
Design studies so that the responses to various exposures of indi­
viduals and populations at high risk and low risk of developing
food allergy can be differentiated.
Use the currently accepted gold standard—double-blind, placebocontrolled oral food challenges (employing standard dosing pro­
tocols and scoring systems, so that the results of various studies
can better be compared)—as the food allergy outcome in research
intervention studies until a simpler reliable method to measure
food allergy is identified and validated.
Account for the potential influence of confounding factors, in addi­
tion to age, sex, and geography, such as breastfeeding, composition
of breast milk, dietary intake, other allergic disorders in the patient
or family history (particularly atopic dermatitis), genetic suscepti­
bility, presence of dogs or cats in the household, number of siblings,
history of antibiotic usage, and exposure to agents or practices that
might impair skin barrier function.
Engage patients or groups representing patients so that research
designs may take into consideration potential socio-psychological,
cultural, and behavioral considerations.
Overall Research Needs

Many genetic and environmental factors could contribute to the onset
of sensitization and to food allergy. For the majority of factors reviewed by
the committee, some, but largely insufficient or inconsistent, evidence exists
at this time about their association with sensitization or food allergy. Nev­

210

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

ertheless, health care providers, patients, and their caregivers still need clear
prevention approaches and authoritative and clear public health guidelines.
Therefore, research needs to continue to support or refute the contribution
of these factors to food sensitization or food allergy. The committee recog­
nizes, though, that for other factors direct or indirect evidence is lacking
and research is not currently warranted (e.g., food additives). Although
some public health guidelines have been developed to guide practices of
health care providers and individuals, efforts have not been undertaken
to assess the impact of such public health guidelines on practices related
to food allergy and on prevalence of food allergy. Prospective studies
and behavioral research should be conducted to accomplish the following
objectives:
•

•

•

•

•

•

Examine risk factors for food allergies in all populations (ages,
sex, ethnicities, comorbidities, socioeconomic strata), especially in
those populations that might have been underrepresented in past
research.
Gain insights about the behaviors of those with (or at risk of)
food allergy and their caregivers as well as about the impact of
public health guidelines on health care providers and individuals’
practices.
Examine the etiology of the rising prevalence of food allergy
within the past two decades, which could identify new targets for
allergy prevention and treatment. For example, what changes have
occurred in food preparation and consumption behavior in com­
munities and what is their potential relationship to the increase
in food allergies? What changes may have occurred in the use
of agents (such as detergents) or practices (such as in personal
hygiene) that might contribute to impaired skin barrier function?
Elucidate, through prospective studies, the role of environmental
factors and gene-environment interactions in the atopic march and
the development of food allergy. For example, do specific factors
increase the risk of an individual progressing from eczema to food
allergy?
Explore potentially unidentified risk factors that may influence
food allergy. For example, although the data available to date have
not shown evidence of a relationship, it is plausible that maternal
and early childhood adiposity and metabolic disorders could be
risk factors for food allergy development.
Using prospective birth cohort studies, evaluate the effects of mul­
tiple early life factors (individually and in combination) and of
possible gene-environmental interactions in the development and

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

•

211

prevention of food allergy in order to inform the design of specific
RCTs.
Identify best practices to engage patients and their families in the
planning stages of research studies so that patients’ and fami­
lies’ concerns are considered, and assess the value of using these
approaches.
Specific Research Needs

In addition, high-quality prospective studies and RCTs are needed on
specific risk determinants for which some evidence exists about their effect
on food allergy related to the most plausible hypotheses to make mean­
ingful conclusions. These studies should be conducted to accomplish the
following objectives:
The Microbial Hypothesis
•

•

•
•

Determine, using well-designed prospective studies, the role of
mode of birth delivery (vaginal, emergency versus elective cesarean
section) and early life microbiome composition on the development
of food allergy.
Assess, through well-designed prospective studies, potential links
between food allergy and antibiotic exposure in children (studies
should include information on the type, dose, and frequency of
antibiotic exposure).
Determine whether pet ownership is related to food allergy by
using well-designed prospective studies.
Assess, with RCTs, the potential benefits of prebiotics and probiot­
ics to prevent the onset of food allergy.

Allergen Avoidance and Exposure
•

•
•

Elucidate the relationship, if any, between breastfeeding and the
onset of food allergy (may also influence through microbiome
modulation) with well-designed prospective studies and take
into account the potential effect of differences in breast milk
composition.
Determine, with RCTs, whether consuming or eliminating or avoid­
ing specific allergenic foods during pregnancy and lactation has any
benefits.
Conduct RCTs, similar to the Learning Early About Peanut study,
to determine whether early introduction of peanut products has

212

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

•

benefit in individuals other than high-risk infants, who were stud­
ied in the original trial.
Examine early introduction of allergenic foods in addition to pea­
nut to determine whether this approach is beneficial in preventing
the development of food allergy.

Nutrition Immunomodulation Hypothesis
•

Assess, with RCTs, the potential role of specific nutrients, such as
vitamin D, folate, or fatty acids, in preventing food allergy.
REFERENCES

Adams, J. S., and M. Hewison. 2008. Unexpected actions of vitamin D: New perspectives
on the regulation of innate and adaptive immunity. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab
4(2):80-90.
Adlerberth, I., and A. E. Wold. 2009. Establishment of the gut microbiota in Western infants.
Acta Paediatr 98(2):229-238.
Agostoni, C., T. Decsi, M. Fewtrell, O. Goulet, S. Kolacek, B. Koletzko, K. F. Michaelsen, L.
Moreno, J. Puntis, J. Rigo, R. Shamir, H. Szajewska, D. Turck, and J. van Goudoever.
2008. Complementary feeding: A commentary by the ESPGHAN Committee on Nutri­
tion. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 46(1):99-110.
Albers, R., J. M. Antoine, R. Bourdet-Sicard, P. C. Calder, M. Gleeson, B. Lesourd, S. Samartin,
I. R. Sanderson, J. Van Loo, F. W. Vas Dias, and B. Watzl. 2005. Markers to measure
immunomodulation in human nutrition intervention studies. Br J Nutr 94(3):452-481.
Alduraywish, S. A., C. J. Lodge, B. Campbell, K. J. Allen, B. Erbas, A. J. Lowe, and S. C.
Dharmage. 2016. The march from early life food sensitization to allergic disease: A sys­
tematic review and meta-analyses of birth cohort studies. Allergy 71(1):77-89.
Allen, K. J., and J. J. Koplin. 2015. Why does Australia appear to have the highest rates of
food allergy? Pediatr Clin North Am 62(6):1441-1451.
Allen, K. J., J. J. Koplin, A. L. Ponsonby, L. C. Gurrin, M. Wake, P. Vuillermin, P. Martin, M.
Matheson, A. Lowe, M. Robinson, D. Tey, N. J. Osborne, T. Dang, H. T. Tina Tan, L.
Thiele, D. Anderson, H. Czech, J. Sanjeevan, G. Zurzolo, T. Dwyer, M. L. Tang, D. Hill,
and S. C. Dharmage. 2013. Vitamin D insufficiency is associated with challenge-proven
food allergy in infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol 131(4):1109-1116.
Amarasekera, M., D. Martino, S. Ashley, H. Harb, D. Kesper, D. Strickland, R. Saffery, and
S. L. Prescott. 2014. Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling identifies a folate-sensitive
region of differential methylation upstream of ZFP57-imprinting regulator in humans.
Faseb J 28(9):4068-4076.
Amoli, M. M., S. Hand, A. H. Hajeer, K. P. Jones, S. Rolf, C. Sting, B. H. Davies, and W. E.
Ollier. 2002. Polymorphism in the STAT6 gene encodes risk for nut allergy. Genes Im­
mun 3(4):220-224.
AND (Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics). 2015. Practice paper of the Academy of Nutri­
tion and Dietetics: Promoting and supporting breastfeeding. http://www.eatrightpro.org/
resource/practice/position-and-practice-papers/practice-papers/practice-paper-promoting­
and-supporting-breastfeeding (accessed July 16, 2016).
Appelt, G. K., M. Chan-Yeung, W. T. A. Watson, H. Dimich-Ward, A. Ferguson, J. Manfreda,
and A. B. Becker. 2004. Breastfeeding and food avoidance are ineffective in preventing
sensitization in high risk children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 113(2):S99.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

213

ASCIA (Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy). 2016a. Food allergy FAQs.
http://www.allergy.org.au/patients/food-allergy/faqs (accessed July 16, 2016).
ASCIA. 2016b. Guidelines: Infant feeding and allergy prevention. http://www.allergy.org.au/
images/pcc/ASCIA_guidelines_infant_feeding_and_allergy_prevention.pdf (accessed May
25, 2016).
Azad, M. B., T. Konya, D. S. Guttman, C. J. Field, M. R. Sears, K. T. HayGlass, P. J.
Mandhane, S. E. Turvey, P. Subbarao, A. B. Becker, J. A. Scott, and A. L. Kozyrskyj.
2015. Infant gut microbiota and food sensitization: Associations in the first year of life.
Clin Exp Allergy 45(3):632-643.
Azad, M. B., T. Konya, R. R. Persaud, D. S. Guttman, R. S. Chari, C. J. Field, M. R. Sears,
P. J. Mandhane, S. E. Turvey, P. Subbarao, A. B. Becker, J. A. Scott, and A. L. Kozyrskyj.
2016. Impact of maternal intrapartum antibiotics, method of birth and breastfeed­
ing on gut microbiota during the first year of life: A prospective cohort study. BJOG
123(6):983-993.
Baek, J. H., Y. H. Shin, I. H. Chung, H. J. Kim, E. G. Yoo, J. W. Yoon, H. M. Jee, Y. E.
Chang, and M. Y. Han. 2014. The link between serum vitamin D level, sensitization to
food allergens, and the severity of atopic dermatitis in infancy. J Pediatr 165(4):849-854.
Ballard, O., and A. L. Morrow. 2013. Human milk composition: Nutrients and bioactive fac­
tors. Pediatr Clin North Am 60(1):49-74.
Barker, D. J. 1990. The fetal and infant origins of adult disease. BMJ 301(6761):1111.
Baumann, S., and A. Lorentz. 2013. Obesity—a promoter of allergy? Int Arch Allergy Im­
munol 162(3):205-213.
Black, P. N., and S. Sharpe. 1997. Dietary fat and asthma: Is there a connection? Eur Respir
J 10(1):6-12.
Boyce, J. A., A. Assa’ad, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, H. A. Sampson, R. A. Wood, M. Plaut,
S. F. Cooper, M. J. Fenton, S. H. Arshad, S. L. Bahna, L. A. Beck, C. Byrd-Bredbenner,
C. A. Camargo, Jr., L. Eichenfield, G. T. Furuta, J. M. Hanifin, C. Jones, M. Kraft, B. D.
Levy, P. Lieberman, S. Luccioli, K. M. McCall, L. C. Schneider, R. A. Simon, F. E. Simons,
S. J. Teach, B. P. Yawn, and J. M. Schwaninger. 2010. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: Report of the NIAID-sponsored expert
panel. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(6 Suppl):S1-S58.
Boyle, R. J., D. Ierodiakonou, T. Khan, J. Chivinge, Z. Robinson, N. Geoghegan, K. Jarrold,
T. Afxentiou, T. Reeves, S. Cunha, M. Trivella, V. Garcia-Larsen, and J. Leonardi-Bee.
2016. Hydrolyzed formula and risk of allergic or autoimmune disease: Systematic review
and meta-analysis. BMJ 352:i974.
Brough, H. A., A. Simpson, K. Makinson, J. Hankinson, S. Brown, A. Douiri, D. C. Belgrave,
M. Penagos, A. C. Stephens, W. H. McLean, V. Turcanu, N. Nicolaou, A. Custovic, and
G. Lack. 2014. Peanut allergy: Effect of environmental peanut exposure in children with
filaggrin loss-of-function mutations. J Allergy Clin Immunol 134(4):867-875.
Brown, S. B., K. W. Reeves, and E. R. Bertone-Johnson. 2014. Maternal folate exposure in
pregnancy and childhood asthma and allergy: A systematic review. Nutr Rev 72(1):55-64.
Brown, S. J., Y. Asai, H. J. Cordell, L. E. Campbell, Y. Zhao, H. Liao, K. Northstone, J. Hen­
derson, R. Alizadehfar, M. Ben-Shoshan, K. Morgan, G. Roberts, L. J. Masthoff, S. G.
Pasmans, P. C. van den Akker, C. Wijmenga, J. O. Hourihane, C. N. Palmer, G. Lack, A.
Clarke, P. R. Hull, A. D. Irvine, and W. H. McLean. 2011. Loss-of-function variants in
the filaggrin gene are a significant risk factor for peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
127(3):661-667.
Bunyavanich, S., S. L. Rifas-Shiman, T. A. Platts-Mills, L. Workman, J. E. Sordillo, C. A.
Camargo, Jr., M. W. Gillman, D. R. Gold, and A. A. Litonjua. 2014. Peanut, milk, and
wheat intake during pregnancy is associated with reduced allergy and asthma in children.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(5):1373-1382.

214

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

CAC (Codex Alimentarius Commission). 2009. Foods derived from modern biotechnology.
Rome: World Health Organization and Food and Agriculture Organization.
Calder, P. C. 2013. n-3 Fatty acids, inflammation and immunity: New mechanisms to explain
old actions. Proc Nutr Soc 72(3):326-336.
Camargo, C. A., Jr., S. Clark, M. S. Kaplan, P. Lieberman, and R. A. Wood. 2007. Regional
differences in EpiPen prescriptions in the United States: The potential role of vitamin D.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(1):131-136.
Campos, E., N. Shimojo, Y. Inoue, T. Arima, S. Suzuki, M. Tomiita, T. Matsuura, A. Hata,
Y. Suzuki, M. Aoyagi, and Y. Kohno. 2007. No association of polymorphisms in the
5’ region of the CD14 gene and food allergy in a Japanese population. Allergol Int
56(1):23-27.
Campos, E. J., N. Shimojo, Y. Suzuki, Y. Mashimo, T. Arima, T. Matsuura, Y. Inoue, A.
Yamaide, M. Tomiita, K. Fujii, A. Hata, and Y. Kohno. 2008. IL-10 gene polymorphism,
but not TGF-beta1 gene polymorphisms, is associated with food allergy in a Japanese
population. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 19(8):716-721.
Cantorna, M. T., Y. Zhu, M. Froicu, and A. Wittke. 2004. Vitamin D status,
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, and the immune system. Am J Clin Nutr 80(6 Suppl):
1717S-1720S.
Chen, S., G. P. Sims, X. X. Chen, Y. Y. Gu, S. Chen, and P. E. Lipsky. 2007. Modula­
tory effects of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 on human B cell differentiation. J Immunol
179(3):1634-1647.
Chen, T. K., J. H. Lee, H. H. Yu, Y. H. Yang, L. C. Wang, Y. T. Lin, and B. L. Chiang. 2012.
Association between human IL-10 gene polymorphisms and serum IL-10 level in patients
with food allergy. J Formos Med Assoc 111(12):686-692.
Cuello-Garcia, C. A., J. L. Brozek, A. Fiocchi, R. Pawankar, J. J. Yepes-Nunez, L. Terracciano,
S. Gandhi, A. Agarwal, Y. Zhang, and H. J. Schunemann. 2015. Probiotics for the pre­
vention of allergy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 136(4):952-961.
Cuello-Garcia, C. A., A. Fiocchi, R. Pawankar, J. J. Yepes-Nunez, G. P. Morgano, Y. Zhang,
K. Ahn, S. Al-Hammadi, A. Agarwal, S. Gandhi, K. Beyer, W. Burks, G. W. Canonica,
M. Ebisawa, R. Kamenwa, B. W. Lee, H. Li, S. Prescott, J. J. Riva, L. Rosenwasser, H.
Sampson, M. Spigler, L. Terracciano, A. Vereda, S. Waserman, H. J. Schunemann, and
J. L. Brozek. 2016. World Allergy Organization-McMaster University Guidelines for Al­
lergic Disease Prevention (GLAD-P): Prebiotics. World Allergy Organ J 9:10.
de Silva, D., M. Geromi, S. Halken, A. Host, S. S. Panesar, A. Muraro, T. Werfel, K. HoffmannSommergruber, G. Roberts, V. Cardona, A. E. Dubois, L. K. Poulsen, R. Van Ree, B.
Vlieg-Boerstra, I. Agache, K. Grimshaw, L. O’Mahony, C. Venter, S. H. Arshad, and
A. Sheikh. 2014. Primary prevention of food allergy in children and adults: Systematic
review. Allergy 69(5):581-589.
Depner, M., M. J. Ege, J. Genuneit, J. Pekkanen, M. Roponen, M. R. Hirvonen, J. C. Dalphin,
V. Kaulek, S. Krauss-Etschmann, J. Riedler, C. Braun-Fahrlander, C. Roduit, R. Lauener,
P. I. Pfefferle, J. Weber, and E. von Mutius. 2013. Atopic sensitization in the first year of
life. J Allergy Clin Immunol 131(3):781-788.
DGAC (Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee). 2015. Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary
Guidelines Advisory Committee: Advisory Report to the Secretary of Health and Hu­
man Services and Secretary of Agriculture. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agriculture
Research Service, Washington DC.
Dharmage, S. C., A. J. Lowe, M. C. Matheson, J. A. Burgess, K. J. Allen, and M. J. Abramson.
2014. Atopic dermatitis and the atopic march revisited. Allergy 69(1):17-27.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

215

Dominguez-Bello, M. G., E. K. Costello, M. Contreras, M. Magris, G. Hidalgo, N. Fierer,
and R. Knight. 2010. Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the ini­
tial microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107(26):11971-11975.
Dowhower Karpa, K., I. M. Paul, J. A. Leckie, S. Shung, N. Carkaci-Salli, K. E. Vrana, D.
Mauger, T. Fausnight, and J. Poger. 2012. A retrospective chart review to identify peri­
natal factors associated with food allergies. Nutr J 11:87.
Du Toit, G., Y. Katz, P. Sasieni, D. Mesher, S. J. Maleki, H. R. Fisher, A. T. Fox, V. Turcanu,
T. Amir, G. Zadik-Mnuhin, A. Cohen, I. Livne, and G. Lack. 2008. Early consumption
of peanuts in infancy is associated with a low prevalence of peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 122(5):984-991.
Du Toit, G., G. Roberts, P. H. Sayre, M. Plaut, H. T. Bahnson, H. Mitchell, S. Radulovic, S.
Chan, A. Fox, V. Turcanu, and G. Lack. 2013. Identifying infants at high risk of peanut
allergy: The Learning Early About Peanut Allergy (LEAP) screening study. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 131(1):135-143.
Du Toit, G., G. Roberts, P. H. Sayre, H. T. Bahnson, S. Radulovic, A. F. Santos, H. A. Brough,
D. Phippard, M. Basting, M. Feeney, V. Turcanu, M. L. Sever, M. Gomez Lorenzo, M.
Plaut, and G. Lack. 2015. Randomized trial of peanut consumption in infants at risk for
peanut allergy. N Engl J Med 372(9):803-813.
Du Toit, G., P. H. Sayre, G. Roberts, M. L. Sever, K. Lawson, H. T. Bahnson, H. A. Brough,
A. F. Santos, K. M. Harris, S. Radulovic, M. Basting, V. Turcanu, M. Plaut, and G. Lack.
2016. Effect of avoidance on peanut allergy after early peanut consumption. N Engl J
Med 374(15):1435-1443.
Dunstan, J. A., T. A. Mori, A. Barden, L. J. Beilin, A. L. Taylor, P. G. Holt, and S. L. Prescott.
2003. Fish oil supplementation in pregnancy modifies neonatal allergen-specific immune
responses and clinical outcomes in infants at high risk of atopy: A randomized, controlled
trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 112(6):1178-1184.
Dunstan, J., C. West, S. McCarthy, J. Metcalfe, S. Meldrum, W. Oddy, M. Tulic, N. D’Vaz,
and S. Prescott. 2012. The relationship between maternal folate status in pregnancy, cord
blood folate levels, and allergic outcomes in early childhood. Allergy: Eur J Allergy Clin
Immunol 67(1):50-57.
Ege, M. J., I. Herzum, G. Buchele, S. Krauss-Etschmann, R. P. Lauener, M. Roponen, A.
Hyvarinen, D. A. Vuitton, J. Riedler, B. Brunekreef, J. C. Dalphin, C. Braun-Fahrlander,
J. Pekkanen, H. Renz, E. von Mutius. 2008. Prenatal exposure to a farm environment
modifies atopic sensitization at birth. J Allergy Clin Immunol 122(2):407-412.
Eggesbo, M., G. Botten, H. Stigum, P. Nafstad, and P. Magnus. 2003. Is delivery by cesarean
section a risk factor for food allergy? J Allergy Clin Immunol 112(2):420-426.
Eggesbo, M., G. Botten, H. Stigum, S. O. Samuelsen, B. Brunekreef, and P. Magnus. 2005.
Cesarean delivery and cow milk allergy/intolerance. Allergy 60(9):1172-1173.
Faa, G., C. Gerosa, D. Fanni, S. Nemolato, P. van Eyken, and V. Fanos. 2013. Factors influ­
encing the development of a personal tailored microbiota in the neonate, with particular
emphasis on antibiotic therapy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(Suppl 2):35-43.
Falth-Magnusson, K., and N. I. Kjellman. 1987. Development of atopic disease in babies
whose mothers were receiving exclusion diet during pregnancy—A randomized study. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 80(6):868-875.
FAO/WHO (Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization). 2001. Evalua­
tion of allergenicity of genetically modified foods. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert
Consultation on Allergenicity of Foods Derived from Biotechnology. Rome: Food and
Agricultural Organization/World Health Organization.
Fasano, A. 2000. Regulation of intercellular tight junctions by zonula occludens toxin and its
eukaryotic analogue zonulin. Ann N Y Acad Sci 915:214-222.

216

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Feeney, M., G. Du Toit, G. Roberts, P. H. Sayre, K. Lawson, H. T. Bahnson, M. L. Sever, S.
Radulovic, M. Plaut, and G. Lack. 2016. Impact of peanut consumption in the LEAP
Study: Feasibility, growth, and nutrition. J Allergy Clin Immunol 138(4):1108-1118.
Fleischer, D. M., J. M. Spergel, A. H. Assa’ad, and J. A. Pongracic. 2013. Primary preven­
tion of allergic disease through nutritional interventions. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
1(1):29-36.
Fleischer, D. M., S. Sicherer, M. Greenhawt, D. Campbell, E. Chan, A. Muraro, S. Halken,
Y. Katz, M. Ebisawa, L. Eichenfield, H. Sampson, G. Lack, G. Du Toit, G. Roberts,
H. Bahnson, M. Feeney, J. Hourihane, J. Spergel, M. Young, A. As’aad, K. Allen, S.
Prescott, S. Kapur, H. Saito, I. Agache, C. A. Akdis, H. Arshad, K. Beyer, A. Dubois, P.
Eigenmann, M. Fernandez-Rivas, K. Grimshaw, K. Hoffman-Sommergruber, A. Host, S.
Lau, L. O’Mahony, C. Mills, N. Papadopoulos, C. Venter, N. Agmon-Levin, A. Kessel,
R. Antaya, B. Drolet, and L. Rosenwasser. 2015. Consensus communication on early
peanut introduction and the prevention of peanut allergy in high-risk infants. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 136(2):258-261.
Fooladi, A. A., S. Khani, H. M. Hosseini, S. F. Mousavi, E. M. Aghdam, and M. R. Nourani.
2013. Impact of altered early infant gut microbiota following breastfeeding and delivery
mode on allergic diseases. Inflamm Allergy Drug Targets 12(6):410-418.
Frazier, A. L., C. A. Camargo, Jr., S. Malspeis, W. C. Willett, and M. C. Young. 2014. Prospec­
tive study of peripregnancy consumption of peanuts or tree nuts by mothers and the risk
of peanut or tree nut allergy in their offspring. JAMA Pediatr 168(2):156-162.
Furuhjelm, C., K. Warstedt, J. Larsson, M. Fredriksson, M. F. Bottcher, K. Falth-Magnusson,
and K. Duchen. 2009. Fish oil supplementation in pregnancy and lactation may decrease
the risk of infant allergy. Acta Paediatr 98(9):1461-1467.
Furuhjelm, C., K. Warstedt, M. Fageras, K. Falth-Magnusson, J. Larsson, M. Fredriksson, and
K. Duchen. 2011. Allergic disease in infants up to 2 years of age in relation to plasma
omega-3 fatty acids and maternal fish oil supplementation in pregnancy and lactation.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 22(5):505-514.
Galli, S. J., P. Starkl, T. Marichal, and M. Tsai. 2016. Mast cells and IgE in defense against
venoms: Possible “good side” of allergy? Allergol Int 65(1):3-15.
Gaudieri, S., M. Lucas, A. Lucas, E. McKinnon, H. Albloushi, A. Rauch, J. di Iulio, D.
Martino, S. L. Prescott, and M. K. Tulic. 2012. Genetic variations in IL28B and allergic
disease in children. PLoS One 7(1):e30607.
Goldberg, M., E. Eisenberg, A. Elizur, N. Rajuan, M. Rachmiel, A. Cohen, G. Zadik-Mnuhin,
and Y. Katz. 2013. Role of parental atopy in cow’s milk allergy: A population-based
study. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 110(4):279-283.
Goldman, A. S. 2000. Modulation of the gastrointestinal tract of infants by human milk. In­
terfaces and interactions. An evolutionary perspective. J Nutr 130(2S Suppl):426S-431S.
Goodman, R. E., M. Ebisawa, F. Ferreira, H. A. Sampson, R. van Ree, S. Vieths, J. L.
Baumert, B. Bohle, S. Lalithambika, J. Wise, and S. L. Taylor. 2016. AllergenOnline:
A peer-reviewed, curated allergen database to assess novel food proteins for potential
cross-reactivity. Molec Nutr Food Res 60(5):1183-1198.
Gottgens, B. 2012. Genome-scale technology driven advances to research into normal and
malignant haematopoiesis. Scientifica (Cairo) 2012:437956.
Granell, R., A. J. Henderson, D. M. Evans, G. D. Smith, A. R. Ness, S. Lewis, T. M. Palmer,
and J. A. Sterne. 2014. Effects of BMI, fat mass, and lean mass on asthma in childhood:
A Mendelian randomization study. PLoS Med 11(7):e1001669.
Greer, F. R., S. H. Sicherer, and A. W. Burks. 2008. Effects of early nutritional interventions
on the development of atopic disease in infants and children: The role of maternal dietary
restriction, breastfeeding, timing of introduction of complementary foods, and hydro­
lyzed formulas. Pediatrics 121(1):183-191.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

217

Grimshaw, K. E., K. Allen, C. A. Edwards, K. Beyer, A. Boulay, L. B. van der Aa, A.
Sprikkelman, S. Belohlavkova, M. Clausen, R. Dubakiene, E. Duggan, M. Reche, L. V.
Marino, P. Norhede, L. Ogorodova, A. Schoemaker, A. Stanczyk-Przyluska, Z. Szepfalusi,
E. Vassilopoulou, S. H. Veehof, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, M. Wjst, and A. E. Dubois. 2009.
Infant feeding and allergy prevention: A review of current knowledge and recommenda­
tions. A EuroPrevall state of the art paper. Allergy 64(10):1407-1416.
Grimshaw, K. E. C., J. Maskell, E. M. Oliver, R. C. G. Morris, K. D. Foote, E. N. C. Mills,
B. M. Margetts, and G. Roberts. 2014. Diet and food allergy development during
infancy: Birth cohort study findings using prospective food diary data. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 133(2):511-519.
Gunaratne, A. W., M. Makrides, and C. T. Collins. 2015. Maternal prenatal and/or postnatal
n-3 long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA) supplementation for preventing
allergies in early childhood. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD010085.
Hand, S., C. Darke, J. Thompson, C. Stingl, S. Rolf, K. P. Jones, and B. H. Davies. 2004.
Human leucocyte antigen polymorphisms in nut-allergic patients in South Wales. Clin
Exp Allergy 34(5):720-724.
Hansen, C. H., D. S. Nielsen, M. Kverka, Z. Zakostelska, K. Klimesova, T. Hudcovic, H.
Tlaskalova-Hogenova, and A. K. Hansen. 2012. Patterns of early gut colonization shape
future immune responses of the host. PLoS One 7(3):e34043.
Hersoug, L. G., and A. Linneberg. 2007. The link between the epidemics of obesity and allergic
diseases: Does obesity induce decreased immune tolerance? Allergy 62(10):1205-1213.
Hollingsworth, J. W., S. Maruoka, K. Boon, S. Garantziotis, Z. Li, J. Tomfohr, N. Bailey,
E. N. Potts, G. Whitehead, D. M. Brass, and D. A. Schwartz. 2008. In utero supple­
mentation with methyl donors enhances allergic airway disease in mice. J Clin Invest
118(10):3462-3469.
Hong, X., and X. Wang. 2014. Epigenetics and development of food allergy (FA) in early
childhood. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 14(9):460.
Hong, X., G. Wang, X. Liu, R. Kumar, H. J. Tsai, L. Arguelles, K. Hao, C. Pearson, K. Ortiz,
A. Bonzagni, S. Apollon, L. Fu, D. Caruso, J. A. Pongracic, R. Schleimer, P. G. Holt, H.
Bauchner, and X. Wang. 2011. Gene polymorphisms, breast-feeding, and development of
food sensitization in early childhood. J Allergy Clin Immunol 128(2):374-381.
Hong, X., K. Hao, C. Ladd-Acosta, K. D. Hansen, H. J. Tsai, X. Liu, X. Xu, T. A. Thornton,
D. Caruso, C. A. Keet, Y. Sun, G. Wang, W. Luo, R. Kumar, R. Fuleihan, A. M. Singh,
J. S. Kim, R. E. Story, R. S. Gupta, P. Gao, Z. Chen, S. O. Walker, T. R. Bartell, T. H.
Beaty, M. D. Fallin, R. Schleimer, P. G. Holt, K. C. Nadeau, R. A. Wood, J. A. Pongracic,
D. E. Weeks, and X. Wang. 2015. Genome-wide association study identifies peanut
allergy-specific loci and evidence of epigenetic mediation in US children. Nat Commun
6:6304.
Hong, X., C. Ladd-Acosta, K. Hao, B. Sherwood, H. Ji, C. A. Keet, R. Kumar, D. Caruso,
X. Liu, G. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Ji, G. Mao, S. O. Walker, T. R. Bartell, Z. Ji, Y. Sun, H. J.
Tsai, J. A. Pongracic, D. E. Weeks, and X. Wang. 2016. Epigenome-wide association
study links site-specific DNA methylation changes with cow’s milk allergy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 138(3):908-911.
Horimukai, K., K. Morita, M. Narita, M. Kondo, H. Kitazawa, M. Nozaki, Y. Shigematsu,
K. Yoshida, H. Niizeki, K. Motomura, H. Sago, T. Takimoto, E. Inoue, N. Kamemura,
H. Kido, J. Hisatsune, M. Sugai, H. Murota, I. Katayama, T. Sasaki, M. Amagai, H.
Morita, A. Matsuda, K. Matsumoto, H. Saito, and Y. Ohya. 2014. Application of mois­
turizer to neonates prevents development of atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
134(4):824-830.
Hu, Y., J. Chen, and H. Li. 2010. Comparison of food allergy prevalence among Chinese
infants in Chongqing, 2009 versus 1999. Pediatr Int 52(5):820-824.

218

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Iho, S., F. Kura, H. Sugiyama, T. Takahashi, and T. Hoshino. 1985. The role of monocytes
in the suppression of PHA-induced proliferation and IL 2 production of human mono­
nuclear cells by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Immunol Lett 11(5-6):331-336.
Ivakhnenko, O., and S. Nyankovskyy. 2013. Effect of the specific infant formula mixture of
oligosaccharides on local immunity and development of allergic and infectious disease in
young children: Randomized study. Pediatria Polska 88(5):398-404.
Jarvis, D., S. Chinn, J. Potts, and P. Burney. 2002. Association of body mass index with respi­
ratory symptoms and atopy: Results from the European Community Respiratory Health
Survey. Clin Exp Allergy 32(6):831-837.
Jones, A. C., E. A. Miles, J. O. Warner, B. M. Colwell, T. N. Bryant, and J. A. Warner. 1996.
Fetal peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferative responses to mitogenic and aller­
genic stimuli during gestation. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 7(3):109-116.
Jones, A. P., D. Palmer, G. Zhang, and S. L. Prescott. 2012. Cord blood 25-hydroxyvitamin
D3 and allergic disease during infancy. Pediatrics 130(5):e1128-e1135.
Jones, B., and J. Chen. 2006. Inhibition of IFN-gamma transcription by site-specific methyla­
tion during T helper cell development. EMBO J 25(11):2443-2452.
Katz, Y., N. Rajuan, M. R. Goldberg, E. Eisenberg, E. Heyman, A. Cohen, and M. Leshno.
2010. Early exposure to cow’s milk protein is protective against IgE-mediated cow’s milk
protein allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(1):77-82.
Kelly, D., T. King, and R. Aminov. 2007. Importance of microbial colonization of the gut in
early life to the development of immunity. Mutat Res 622(1-2):58-69.
Klemens, C. M., D. R. Berman, and E. L. Mozurkewich. 2011. The effect of perinatal omega-3
fatty acid supplementation on inflammatory markers and allergic diseases: A systematic
review. BJOG 118(8):916-925.
Kong, X. Y., Y. Yang, J. Guan, and R. Z. Wang. 2014. Probiotics’ preventive effect on pe­
diatric food allergy: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Chin Med Sci J
29(3):144-147.
Koplin, J. J., and K. J. Allen. 2013. Optimal timing for solids introduction—why are the
guidelines always changing? Clin Exp Allergy 43(8):826-834.
Koplin, J. J., N. J. Osborne, M. Wake, P. E. Martin, L. C. Gurrin, M. N. Robinson, D. Tey,
M. Slaa, L. Thiele, L. Miles, D. Anderson, T. Tan, T. D. Dang, D. J. Hill, A. J. Lowe,
M. C. Matheson, A. L. Ponsonby, M. L. Tang, S. C. Dharmage, and K. J. Allen. 2010.
Can early introduction of egg prevent egg allergy in infants? A population-based study.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(4):807-813.
Koplin, J. J., S. C. Dharmage, A. L. Ponsonby, M. L. Tang, A. J. Lowe, L. C. Gurrin, N. J.
Osborne, P. E. Martin, M. N. Robinson, M. Wake, D. J. Hill, and K. J. Allen. 2012a.
Environmental and demographic risk factors for egg allergy in a population-based study
of infants. Allergy 67(11):1415-1422.
Koplin, J. J., M. L. Tang, P. E. Martin, N. J. Osborne, A. J. Lowe, A. L. Ponsonby, M. N.
Robinson, D. Tey, L. Thiele, D. J. Hill, L. C. Gurrin, M. Wake, S. C. Dharmage, and
K. J. Allen. 2012b. Predetermined challenge eligibility and cessation criteria for oral food
challenges in the HealthNuts population-based study of infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol
129(4):1145-1147.
Koplin, J. J., R. L. Peters, A. L. Ponsonby, L. C. Gurrin, D. Hill, M. L. Tang, S. C. Dharmage,
and K. J. Allen. 2014. Increased risk of peanut allergy in infants of Asian-born parents
compared to those of Australian-born parents. Allergy 69(12):1639-1647.
Koplin, J. J., N. H. Suaini, P. Vuillermin, J. A. Ellis, M. Panjari, A. L. Ponsonby, R. L. Peters,
M. C. Matheson, D. Martino, T. Dang, N. J. Osborne, P. Martin, A. Lowe, L. C. Gur­
rin, M. L. Tang, M. Wake, T. Dwyer, J. Hopper, S. C. Dharmage, and K. J. Allen. 2016.
Polymorphisms affecting vitamin D-binding protein modify the relationship between
serum vitamin D (25[OH]D3) and food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(2):500-506.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

219

Kozyrskyj, A. 2015. Infant gut microbial markers of food sensitization at age 1. Presented at
Comittee Workshop, August 31, 2015. Washington, DC.
Kramer, M. S., and R. Kakuma. 2012. Maternal dietary antigen avoidance during pregnancy
or lactation, or both, for preventing or treating atopic disease in the child. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 9:Cd000133.
Kumar, R., F. Ouyang, R. E. Story, J. A. Pongracic, X. Hong, G. Wang, C. Pearson, K. Ortiz,
H. Bauchner, and X. Wang. 2009. Gestational diabetes, atopic dermatitis, and allergen
sensitization in early childhood. J Allergy Clin Immunol 124(5):1031-1038.
Kusunoki, T., I. Okafuji, T. Yoshioka, M. Saito, R. Nishikomori, T. Heike, M. Sugai, A.
Shimizu, and T. Nakahata. 2005. SPINK5 polymorphism is associated with disease
severity and food allergy in children with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
115(3):636-638.
Lack, G. 2012. Update on risk factors for food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 129(5):
1187-1197.
Lack, G., D. Fox, K. Northstone, and J. Golding. 2003. Factors associated with the develop­
ment of peanut allergy in childhood. N Engl J Med 348(11):977-985.
Langley-Evans, S. 1997. Fetal programming of immune function and respiratory disease. Clin
Exp Allergy 27(12):1377-1379.
Lau, M. Y., S. C. Dharmage, J. A. Burgess, A. J. Lowe, C. J. Lodge, B. Campbell, and M. C.
Matheson. 2014. CD14 polymorphisms, microbial exposure and allergic diseases: A
systematic review of gene-environment interactions. Allergy 69(11):1440-1453.
Lauritzen, L., T. M. Kjaer, M. B. Fruekilde, K. F. Michaelsen, and H. Frokiaer. 2005. Fish
oil supplementation of lactating mothers affects cytokine production in 2 1/2-year-old
children. Lipids 40(7):669-676.
Li, M., J. B. Liu, Q. Liu, M. Yao, R. Cheng, H. Xue, H. Zhou, and Z. Yao. 2012. Interac­
tions between FLG mutations and allergens in atopic dermatitis. Arch Dermatol Res
304(10):787-793.
Li, M., M. Wang, and S. M. Donovan. 2014. Early development of the gut microbiome and
immune-mediated childhood disorders. Semin Reprod Med 32(1):74-86.
Liao, S. L., S. H. Lai, K. W. Yeh, Y. L. Huang, T. C. Yao, M. H. Tsai, M.C. Hua, and J. L.
Huang. 2014. Exclusive breastfeeding is associated with reduced cow’s milk sensitization
in early childhood. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 25(5):456-461.
Lilja, G., A. Dannaeus, K. Falth-Magnusson, V. Graff-Lonnevig, S. G. Johansson, N. I.
Kjellman, and H. Oman. 1988. Immune response of the atopic woman and foetus:
Effects of high- and low-dose food allergen intake during late pregnancy. Clin Allergy
18(2):131-142.
Litonjua, A. A., and S. T. Weiss. 2007. Is vitamin D deficiency to blame for the asthma epi­
demic? J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(5):1031-1035.
Litonjua, A. A., and S. T. Weiss. 2008. Reply. J Allergy Clin Immunol 121(4):1066.
Liu, X., T. H. Beaty, P. Deindl, S. K. Huang, S. Lau, C. Sommerfeld, M. D. Fallin, W. H.
Kao, U. Wahn, and R. Nickel. 2004. Associations between specific serum IgE response
and 6 variants within the genes IL4, IL13, and IL4RA in German children: The German
Multicenter Atopy Study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 113(3):489-495.
Liu, X., S. Zhang, H. J. Tsai, X. Hong, B. Wang, Y. Fang, X. Liu, J. A. Pongracic, and X.
Wang. 2009. Genetic and environmental contributions to allergen sensitization in a Chi­
nese twin study. Clin Exp Allergy 39(7):991-998.
Liu, X., G. Wang, X. Hong, D. Wang, H. J. Tsai, S. Zhang, L. Arguelles, R. Kumar, H. Wang,
R. Liu, Y. Zhou, C. Pearson, K. Ortiz, R. Schleimer, P. G. Holt, J. Pongracic, H. E. Price,
C. Langman, and X. Wang. 2011. Gene-vitamin D interactions on food sensitization: A
prospective birth cohort study. Allergy 66(11):1442-1448.

220

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Liu, X., L. Arguelles, Y. Zhou, G. Wang, Q. Chen, H. J. Tsai, X. Hong, R. Liu, H. E. Price,
C. Pearson, S. Apollon, N. Cruz, R. Schleimer, C. B. Langman, J. A. Pongracic, and X.
Wang. 2013. Longitudinal trajectory of vitamin D status from birth to early childhood
in the development of food sensitization. Pediatr Res 74(3):321-326.
Lodge, C. J., K. J. Allen, A. J. Lowe, and S. C. Dharmage. 2013. Overview of evidence in
prevention and aetiology of food allergy: A review of systematic reviews. Int J Environ
Res Public Health 10(11):5781-5806.
Lodge, C. J., D. J. Tan, M. X. Lau, X. Dai, R. Tham, A. J. Lowe, G. Bowatte, K. J. Allen, and
S. C. Dharmage. 2015. Breastfeeding and asthma and allergies: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Acta Paediatr 104(467):38-53.
Loo, E. X., G. V. Llanora, Q. Lu, M. M. Aw, B. W. Lee, and L. P. Shek. 2014. Supplementation
with probiotics in the first 6 months of life did not protect against eczema and allergy
in at-risk Asian infants: A 5-year follow-up. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 163(1):25-28.
Lowe, A. J., C. S. Hosking, C. M. Bennett, K. J. Allen, C. Axelrad, J. B. Carlin, M. J.
Abramson, S. C. Dharmage, and D. J. Hill. 2011. Effect of a partially hydrolyzed whey
infant formula at weaning on risk of allergic disease in high-risk children: A randomized
controlled trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 128(2):360-365.
Lowe, A. J., S. C. Dharmage, K. J. Allen, M. L. Tang, and D. J. Hill. 2013. The role of par­
tially hydrolyzed whey formula for the prevention of allergic disease: Evidence and gaps.
Expert Rev Clin Immunol 9(1):31-41.
Luccioli, S., Y. Zhang, L. Verrill, M. Ramos-Valle, and E. Kwegyir-Afful. 2014. Infant feeding
practices and reported food allergies at 6 years of age. Pediatrics 134(Suppl 1):S21-S28.
Ma, J., L. Xiao, and S. B. Knowles. 2010. Obesity, insulin resistance and the prevalence of
atopy and asthma in US adults. Allergy 65(11):1455-1463.
Madore, A. M., V. T. Vaillancourt, Y. Asai, R. Alizadehfar, M. Ben-Shoshan, D. L. Michel,
A. L. Kozyrskyj, A. Becker, M. Chan-Yeung, A. E. Clarke, P. Hull, D. Daley, A. J.
Sandford, and C. Laprise. 2013. HLA-DQB1*02 and DQB1*06:03P are associated with
peanut allergy. Eur J Hum Genet 21(10):1181-1184.
Magdelijns, F. J., M. Mommers, J. Penders, L. Smits, and C. Thijs. 2011. Folic acid use in
pregnancy and the development of atopy, asthma, and lung function in childhood. Pe­
diatrics 128(1):e135-144.
Mailhol, C., F. Giordano-Labadie, V. Lauwers-Cances, A. Ammoury, C. Paul, and F. Rance.
2014. Point prevalence and risk factors for food allergy in a cohort of 386 children with
atopic dermatitis attending a multidisciplinary dermatology/paediatric allergy clinic. Eur
J Dermatol 24(1):63-69.
Makrides, M., R. A. Gibson, A. J. McPhee, C. T. Collins, P. G. Davis, L. W. Doyle, K. Simmer,
P. B. Colditz, S. Morris, L. G. Smithers, K. Willson, and P. Ryan. 2009. Neurodevelop­
mental outcomes of preterm infants fed high-dose docosahexaenoic acid: A randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 301(2):175-182.
Makrides, M., R. A. Gibson, A. J. McPhee, L. Yelland, J. Quinlivan, P. Ryan, and Domino
Investigative Team. 2010. Effect of DHA supplementation during pregnancy on maternal
depression and neurodevelopment of young children: A randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 304(15):1675-1683.
Marichal, T., P. Starkl, L. L. Reber, J. Kalesnikoff, H. C. Oettgen, M. Tsai, M. Metz, and S. J.
Galli. 2013. A beneficial role for immunoglobulin E in host defense against honeybee
venom. Immunity 39(5):963-975.
Marrs, T., K. D. Bruce, K. Logan, D. W. Rivett, M. R. Perkin, G. Lack, and C. Flohr. 2013. Is
there an association between microbial exposure and food allergy? A systematic review.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 24(4):311-320.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

221

Martin, P. E., J. J. Koplin, J. K. Eckert, A. J. Lowe, A. L. Ponsonby, N. J. Osborne, L. C.
Gurrin, M. N. Robinson, D. J. Hill, M. L. K. Tang, S. C. Dharmage, and K. J. Allen.
2013. The prevalence and socio-demographic risk factors of clinical eczema in infancy:
A population-based observational study. Clin Exp Allergy 43(6):642-651.
Martin, P. E., J. K. Eckert, J. J. Koplin, A. J. Lowe, L. C. Gurrin, S. C. Dharmage, P.
Vuillermin, M. L. Tang, A. L. Ponsonby, M. Matheson, D. J. Hill, and K. J. Allen. 2015.
Which infants with eczema are at risk of food allergy? Results from a population-based
cohort. Clin Exp Allergy 45(1):255-264.
Martin, R., A. J. Nauta, K. Ben Amor, L. M. Knippels, J. Knol, and J. Garssen. 2010. Early
life: Gut microbiota and immune development in infancy. Benef Microbes 1(4):367-382.
Martino, D., J. E. Joo, A. Sexton-Oates, T. Dang, K. Allen, R. Saffery, and S. Prescott. 2014.
Epigenome-wide association study reveals longitudinally stable DNA methylation dif­
ferences in CD4+ T cells from children with IgE-mediated food allergy. Epigenetics
9(7):998-1006.
Matsui, E. C., and W. Matsui. 2009. Higher serum folate levels are associated with a lower
risk of atopy and wheeze. J Allergy Clin Immunol 123(6):1253-1259.
McAndrew, F., J. Thompson, L. Fellows, A. Large, M. Speed, and M. J. Renfrew. 2012.
Infant feeding survey. Leeds, England: Health and Social Care Information Centre, IFF
Research.
McGowan, E. C., G. R. Bloomberg, P. J. Gergen, C. M. Visness, K. F. Jaffee, M. Sandel, G.
O’Connor, M. Kattan, J. Gern, and R. A. Wood. 2015. Influence of early-life exposures
on food sensitization and food allergy in an inner-city birth cohort. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 135(1):171-178.
McLoughlin, R. M., and K. H. Mills. 2011. Influence of gastrointestinal commensal bacteria
on the immune responses that mediate allergy and asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol
127(5):1097-1107; quiz 1108-1109.
Metsala, J., A. Lundqvist, M. Kaila, M. Gissler, T. Klaukka, and S. M. Virtanen. 2010. Ma­
ternal and perinatal characteristics and the risk of cow’s milk allergy in infants up to
2 years of age: A case-control study nested in the Finnish population. Am J Epidemiol
171(12):1310-1316.
Metsala, J., A. Lundqvist, L. J. Virta, M. Kaila, M. Gissler, and S. M. Virtanen. 2013.
Mother’s and offspring’s use of antibiotics and infant allergy to cow’s milk. Epidemiol­
ogy 24(2):303-309.
Mullins, R. J., S. Clark, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2009. Regional variation in epinephrine
autoinjector prescriptions in Australia: More evidence for the vitamin D-anaphylaxis
hypothesis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 103(6):488-495.
Mullins, R. J., S. Clark, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2010. Regional variation in infant hypoaller­
genic formula prescriptions in Australia. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 21(2 Pt 2):e413-e420.
Mullins, R. J., S. Clark, C. Katelaris, V. Smith, G. Solley, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2011. Season
of birth and childhood food allergy in Australia. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 22(6):583-589.
Muraro, A., S. Halken, S. H. Arshad, K. Beyer, A. E. Dubois, G. Du Toit, P. A. Eigenmann,
K. E. Grimshaw, A. Hoest, G. Lack, L. O’Mahony, N. G. Papadopoulos, S. Panesar, S.
Prescott, G. Roberts, D. de Silva, C. Venter, V. Verhasselt, A. C. Akdis, and A. Sheikh.
2014. Primary prevention of food allergy. Allergy 69(5):590-601.
Muto, T., A. Fukuoka, K. Kabashima, S. F. Ziegler, K. Nakanishi, K. Matsushita, and T.
Yoshimoto. 2014. The role of basophils and proallergic cytokines, TSLP and IL-33, in
cutaneously sensitized food allergy. Int Immunol 26(10):539-549.

222

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Myers, J. M. B., N. Wang, G. K. LeMasters, D. I. Bernstein, T. G. Epstein, M. A. Lindsey,
M. B. Ericksen, R. Chakraborty, P. H. Ryan, M. S. Villareal, J. W. Burkle, J. E. Lockey,
T. Reponen, and G. K. K. Hershey. 2010. Genetic and environmental risk factors for
childhood eczema development and allergic sensitization in the CCAAPS Cohort. J Invest
Derm 130(2):430-437.
Myles, I. A. 2014. Fast food fever: Reviewing the impacts of the Western diet on immunity.
Nutr J 13:61.
Neeland, M. R., D. J. Martino, and K. J. Allen. 2015. The role of gene-environment interactions
in the development of food allergy. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 9(11):1317-1318.
Negoro, T., K. Orihara, T. Irahara, H. Nishiyama, K. Hagiwara, R. Nishida, H. Takagi, K.
Satoh, Y. Yamamoto, S. Shimizu, T. Hagiwara, M. Ishii, T. Tanioka, Y. Nakano, K.
Takeda, I. Yoshimura, Y. Iikura, and T. Tobe. 2006. Influence of SNPs in cytokine-related
genes on the severity of food allergy and atopic eczema in children. Pediatr Allergy Im­
munol 17(8):583-590.
Newberry, S. J., M. Chung, M. Booth, M. A. Maglione, A. M. Tang, C. E. O’Hanlon, D. D.
Wang, A. Okunogbe, C. Huang, A. Motala, M. Timmer, W. Dudley, R. Shanman,
T. R. Coker, and P. G. Shekelle. 2016. Omega-3 fatty acids and maternal and child
health: An updated systematic review. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 224.
AHRQ Publication No. 16-E003-EF. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality.
NHMRC (National Health and Medical Research Council). 2013. Infant feeding guidelines.
Canberra, Australia: National Health and Medical Research Council. https://www.eat
forhealth.gov.au/guidelines (accessed November 14, 2016).
NHS (National Health Service). 2015a. Pregnancy and baby: Food allergies in babies. http://
www.nhs.uk/conditions/pregnancy-and-baby/pages/food-allergies-in-children.aspx (ac­
cessed June 23, 2016).
NHS. 2015b. Pregnancy and baby: Your baby’s first solid foods. http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/
pregnancy-and-baby/pages/solid-foods-weaning.aspx (accessed July 16, 2016).
Nordlee, J. A., S. L. Taylor, J. A. Townsend, L. A. Thomas, and R. K. Bush. 1996. Identifica­
tion of a Brazil-nut allergen in transgenic soybeans. N Engl J Med 334(11):688-692.
Norizoe, C., N. Akiyama, T. Segawa, H. Tachimoto, H. Mezawa, H. Ida, and M. Urashima.
2014. Increased food allergy and vitamin D: Randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Pediatr Int 56(1):6-12.
Noti, M., B. S. Kim, M. C. Siracusa, G. D. Rak, M. Kubo, A. E. Moghaddam, Q. A. Sattentau,
M. R. Comeau, J. M. Spergel, and D. Artis. 2014. Exposure to food allergens through in­
flamed skin promotes intestinal food allergy through the thymic stromal lymphopoietin­
basophil axis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(5):1390-1399.
Okupa, A. Y., R. F. Lemanske, Jr., D. J. Jackson, M. D. Evans, R. A. Wood, and E. C. Matsui.
2013. Early-life folate levels are associated with incident allergic sensitization. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 131(1):226-228.
Osborn, D. A., and J. Sinn. 2006. Formulas containing hydrolyzed protein for prevention
of allergy and food intolerance in infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev(4):CD003664.
Osborn, D. A., and J. Sinn. 2009. Formulas containing hydrolysed protein for prevention
of allergy and food intolerance in infants (Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1):
CD003664.
Osborne, N. J., O. C. Ukoumunne, M. Wake, and K. J. Allen. 2012. Prevalence of ec­
zema and food allergy is associated with latitude in Australia. J Allergy Clin Immunol
129(3):865-867.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

223

Ouyang, F., R. Kumar, J. Pongracic, R. E. Story, X. Liu, B. Wang, H. Xing, X. Liu, Z. Li,
W. Zhang, Y. Fang, S. Zhang, X. Xu, and X. Wang. 2009. Adiposity, serum lipid
levels, and allergic sensitization in Chinese men and women. J Allergy Clin Immunol
123(4):940-948.
Oxelius, V. A., R. Krueger, S. Ahlstedt, T. Keil, S. Lau, and U. Wahn. 2015. Innate IgG mol­
ecules and innate B cells expressed by immunoglobulin constant heavy G chain (Fcγ)
genetic marker genes are involved in the ‘allergic march’ of IgE sensitization in children.
Int Arch Allergy Immunol 166(1):25-29.
Pabst, O., and A. M. Mowat. 2012. Oral tolerance to food protein. Mucosal Immunol
5(3):232-239.
Palm, N. W., R. K. Rosenstein, S. Yu, D. D. Schenten, E. Florsheim, and R. Medzhitov. 2013.
Bee venom phospholipase A2 induces a primary type 2 response that is dependent on the
receptor ST2 and confers protective immunity. Immunity 39(5):976-985.
Palmer, D. J., T. Sullivan, M. S. Gold, S. L. Prescott, R. Heddle, R. A. Gibson, and M.
Makrides. 2012. Effect of n-3 long chain polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation
in pregnancy on infants’ allergies in first year of life: Randomised controlled trial. BMJ
344:e184.
Palmer, D. J., J. Metcalfe, M. Makrides, M. S. Gold, P. Quinn, C. E. West, R. Loh, and S. L.
Prescott. 2013. Early regular egg exposure in infants with eczema: A randomized con­
trolled trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 132(2):387-392.
Panjari, M., J. J. Koplin, S. C. Dharmage, R. L. Peters, L. C. Gurrin, S. M. Sawyer, V.
McWilliam, J. K. Eckert, D. Vicendese, B. Erbas, M. C. Matheson, M. L. Tang, J.
Douglass, A. L. Ponsonby, T. Dwyer, S. Goldfeld, and K. J. Allen. 2016. Nut allergy
prevalence and differences between Asian-born children and Australian-born children
of Asian descent: A state-wide survey of children at primary school entry in Victoria,
Australia. Clin Exp Allergy 46(4):602-609.
Pele, F., E. Bajeux, H. Gendron, C. Monfort, F. Rouget, L. Multigner, J. F. Viel, and S. Cordier.
2013. Maternal fish and shellfish consumption and wheeze, eczema and food allergy at
age two: A prospective cohort study in Brittany, France. Environ Health 12:102.
Perkin, M. R., K. Logan, A. Tseng, B. Raji, S. Ayis, J. Peacock, H. Brough, T. Marrs, S.
Radulovic, J. Craven, C. Flohr, and G. Lack. 2016. Randomized trial of introduction of
allergenic foods in breast-fed infants. N Engl J Med 374(18):1733-1743.
Peters, R. L., S. C. Dharmage, L. C. Gurrin, J. J. Koplin, A. L. Ponsonby, A. J. Lowe, M. L.
Tang, D. Tey, M. Robinson, D. Hill, H. Czech, L. Thiele, N. J. Osborne, and K. J. Allen.
2014. The natural history and clinical predictors of egg allergy in the first 2 years of life:
A prospective, population-based cohort study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(2):485-491.
Peters, R. L., K. J. Allen, S. C. Dharmage, C. J. Lodge, J. J. Koplin, A. L. Ponsonby, M. Wake,
A. J. Lowe, M. L. Tang, M. C. Matheson, and L. C. Gurrin. 2015. Differential factors
associated with challenge-proven food allergy phenotypes in a population cohort of
infants: A latent class analysis. Clin Exp Allergy 45(5):953-963.
Poole, J. A., K. Barriga, D. Y. Leung, M. Hoffman, G. S. Eisenbarth, M. Rewers, and J. M.
Norris. 2006. Timing of initial exposure to cereal grains and the risk of wheat allergy.
Pediatrics 117(6):2175-2182.
Praveen, P., F. Jordan, C. Priami, and M. J. Morine. 2015. The role of breast-feeding in infant
immune system: A systems perspective on the intestinal microbiome. Microbiome 3:41.
Prescott, S. L., C. Macaubas, B. J. Holt, T. B. Smallacombe, R. Loh, P. D. Sly, and P. G. Holt.
1998. Transplacental priming of the human immune system to environmental allergens:
Universal skewing of initial T cell responses toward the Th2 cytokine profile. J Immunol
160(10):4730-4737.

224

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Prescott, S. L., P. Smith, M. Tang, D. J. Palmer, J. Sinn, S. J. Huntley, B. Cormack, R. G.
Heine, R. A. Gibson, and M. Makrides. 2008. The importance of early complementary
feeding in the development of oral tolerance: Concerns and controversies. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 19(5):375-380.
Prince, B. T., M. J. Mandel, K. Nadeau, and A. M. Singh. 2015. Gut microbiome and the de­
velopment of food allergy and allergic disease. Pediatr Clin North Am 62(6):1479-1492.
Pyrhonen, K., S. Nayha, L. Hiltunen, and E. Laara. 2013. Caesarean section and allergic
manifestations: Insufficient evidence of association found in population-based study of
children aged 1 to 4 years. Acta Paediatr 102(10):982-989.
Reichel, H., H. P. Koeffler, A. Tobler, and A. W. Norman. 1987. 1 alpha,25-Dihydroxyvitamin
D3 inhibits gamma-interferon synthesis by normal human peripheral blood lymphocytes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 84(10):3385-3389.
Roduit, C., R. Frei, M. Depner, B. Schaub, G. Loss, J. Genuneit, P. Pfefferle, A. Hyvarinen,
A. M. Karvonen, J. Riedler, J. C. Dalphin, J. Pekkanen, E. von Mutius, C. BraunFahrlander, and R. Lauener. 2014. Increased food diversity in the first year of life is
inversely associated with allergic diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(4):1056-1064.
Roider, E., T. Ruzicka, and J. Schauber. 2013. Vitamin D, the cutaneous barrier, antimicrobial
peptides and allergies: Is there a link? Allergy Asthma Immunol Res 5(3):119-128.
Rudders, S. A., J. A. Espinola, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2010. North-south differences in US
emergency department visits for acute allergic reactions. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
104(5):413-416.
Saarinen, K. M., K. Juntunen-Backman, A. L. Jarvenpaa, P. Kuitunen, L. Lope, M. Renlund,
M. Siivola, and E. Savilahti. 1999. Supplementary feeding in maternity hospitals and the
risk of cow’s milk allergy: A prospective study of 6209 infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol
104(2 Pt 1):457-461.
Sampson, H. A., R. Gerth van Wijk, C. Bindslev-Jensen, S. Sicherer, S. S. Teuber, A. W. Burks,
A. E. Dubois, K. Beyer, P. A. Eigenmann, J. M. Spergel, T. Werfel, and V. M. Chinchilli.
2012. Standardizing double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenges: American
Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology-European Academy of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology PRACTALL consensus report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 130(6):1260-1274.
Senechal, H., S. Geny, F. X. Desvaux, M. Busson, C. Mayer, Y. Aron, J. P. Oster, J. C. Bessot,
G. Peltre, G. Pauli, and E. Swierczewski. 1999. Genetics and specific immune response in
allergy to birch pollen and food: Evidence of a strong, positive association between atopy
and the HLA class II allele HLA-DR7. J Allergy Clin Immunol 104(2 Pt 1):395-401.
Shek, L. P., M. F. Chong, J. Y. Lim, S. E. Soh, and Y. S. Chong. 2012. Role of dietary longchain polyunsaturated fatty acids in infant allergies and respiratory diseases. Clin Dev
Immunol 2012:730568.
Sicherer, S. H., T. J. Furlong, H. H. Maes, R. J. Desnick, H. A. Sampson, and B. D. Gelb. 2000.
Genetics of peanut allergy: A twin study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 106(1 Pt 1):53-56.
Siegel, A. M., K. D. Stone, G. Cruse, M. G. Lawrence, A. Olivera, M. Y. Jung, J. S. Barber,
A. F. Freeman, S. M. Holland, M. O’Brien, N. Jones, C. G. Nelson, L. B. Wisch, H. H.
Kong, A. Desai, O. Farber, A. M. Gilfillan, J. Rivera, and J. D. Milner. 2013. Diminished
allergic disease in patients with STAT3 mutations reveals a role for STAT3 signaling in
mast cell degranulation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 132(6):1388-1396.
Simopoulos, A. P. 2002. The importance of the ratio of omega-6/omega-3 essential fatty acids.
Biomed Pharmacother 56(8):365-379.
Simpson, E. L., J. R. Chalmers, J. M. Hanifin, K. S. Thomas, M. J. Cork, W. H. McLean, S. J.
Brown, Z. Chen, Y. Chen, and H. C. Williams. 2014. Emollient enhancement of the skin
barrier from birth offers effective atopic dermatitis prevention. J Allergy Clin Immunol
134(4):818-823.

POTENTIAL GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS

225

Starkl, P., T. Marichal, N. Gaudenzio, L. L. Reber, R. Sibilano, M. Tsai, and S. J. Galli. 2016.
IgE antibodies, FceRIα, and IgE-mediated local anaphylaxis can limit snake venom toxic­
ity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(1):246-257.
Stelmach, I., M. Bobrowska-Korzeniowska, K. Smejda, P. Majak, J. Jerzynska, W. Stelmach, K.
Polanska, W. Sobala, J. Krysicka, and W. Hanke. 2014. Risk factors for the development
of atopic dermatitis and early wheeze. Allergy Asthma Proc 35(5):382-389.
Strachan, D. P. 1989. Hay fever, hygiene, and household size. BMJ 299(6710):1259-1260.
Strid, J., J. Hourihane, I. Kimber, R. Callard, and S. Strobel. 2005. Epicutaneous exposure
to peanut protein prevents oral tolerance and enhances allergic sensitization. Clin Exp
Allergy 35(6):757-766.
Sudo, N., S. Sawamura, K. Tanaka, Y. Aiba, C. Kubo, and Y. Koga. 1997. The requirement of
intestinal bacterial flora for the development of an IgE production system fully susceptible
to oral tolerance induction. J Immunol 159(4):1739-1745.
Tan, H. T., J. A. Ellis, J. J. Koplin, M. C. Matheson, L. C. Gurrin, A. J. Lowe, P. E. Martin,
T. D. Dang, M. Wake, M. L. Tang, A. L. Ponsonby, S. C. Dharmage, and K. J. Allen.
2012a. Filaggrin loss-of-function mutations do not predict food allergy over and above
the risk of food sensitization among infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol 130(5):1211-1213.
Tan, T. H., J. A. Ellis, R. Saffery, and K. J. Allen. 2012b. The role of genetics and environment
in the rise of childhood food allergy. Clin Exp Allergy 42(1):20-29.
Tey, D., K. J. Allen, R. L. Peters, J. J. Koplin, M. L. K. Tang, L. C. Gurrin, A.-L. Ponsonby,
A. J. Lowe, M. Wake, and S. C. Dharmage. 2014. Population response to change in
infant feeding guidelines for allergy prevention. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(2):476-484.
Togias, A., S. F. Cooper, M. L. Acebal, A. Assa’ad, L. Baker, L. A. Beck, J. Block, C. ByrdBredbenner, E. S. Chan, L. F. Eichenfield, D. M. Fleischer, G. J. Fuchs III, G. T. Furuta,
M. J. Greenhawt, R. S. Gupta, M. Habich, S. M. Jones, K. Keaton, A. Muraro, M. Plaut,
L. J. Rosenwasser, D. Rotrosen, H. A. Sampson, L. Schneider, S. H. Sicherer, R. Sidbury,
J. Spergel, D. R. Stukus, C. Venter, and J. A. Boyce. 2017. Addendum guidelines for the
prevention of peanut allergy in the United States: Report of the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases–sponsored expert panel. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol
13(1):1-20.
Torgerson, T. R., A. Linane, N. Moes, S. Anover, V. Mateo, F. Rieux-Laucat, O. Hermine, S.
Vijay, E. Gambineri, N. Cerf-Bensussan, A. Fischer, H. D. Ochs, O. Goulet, and F. M.
Ruemmele. 2007. Severe food allergy as a variant of IPEX syndrome caused by a deletion
in a noncoding region of the FOXP3 gene. Gastroenterology 132(5):1705-1717.
Tsai, H. J., R. Kumar, J. Pongracic, X. Liu, R. Story, Y. Yu, D. Caruso, J. Costello, A.
Schroeder, Y. Fang, H. Demirtas, K. E. Meyer, M. R. O’Gorman, and X. Wang. 2009.
Familial aggregation of food allergy and sensitization to food allergens: A family-based
study. Clin Exp Allergy 39(1):101-109.
Van Gysel, D., E. Govaere, K. Verhamme, E. Doli, and F. De Baets. 2009. Body mass index
in Belgian schoolchildren and its relationship with sensitization and allergic symptoms.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 20(3):246-253.
Vassallo, M. F., A. Banerji, S. A. Rudders, S. Clark, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2010. Season of
birth and food-induced anaphylaxis in Boston. Allergy 65(11):1492-1493.
Venkataraman, D., N. Soto-Ramirez, R. J. Kurukulaaratchy, J. W. Holloway, W. Karmaus,
S. L. Ewart, S. H. Arshad, and M. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse. 2014. Filaggrin loss-of-function
mutations are associated with food allergy in childhood and adolescence. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 134(4):876-882.
Visness, C. M., S. J. London, J. L. Daniels, J. S. Kaufman, K. B. Yeatts, A. M. Siega-Riz, A. H.
Liu, A. Calatroni, and D. C. Zeldin. 2009. Association of obesity with IgE levels and
allergy symptoms in children and adolescents: Results from the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey 2005-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 123(5):1163-1169.

226

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

von Berg, A., B. Filipiak-Pittroff, U. Kramer, E. Link, C. Bollrath, I. Brockow, S. Koletzko,
A. Grubl, J. Heinrich, H. E. Wichmann, C. P. Bauer, D. Reinhardt, and D. Berdel. 2008.
Preventive effect of hydrolyzed infant formulas persists until age 6 years: Long-term
results from the German Infant Nutritional Intervention Study (GINI). J Allergy Clin
Immunol 121(6):1442-1447.
von Berg, A., B. Filipiak-Pittroff, U. Kramer, B. Hoffmann, E. Link, C. Beckmann, U.
Hoffmann, D. Reinhardt, A. Grubl, J. Heinrich, H. E. Wichmann, C. P. Bauer, S.
Koletzko, and D. Berdel. 2013a. Allergies in high-risk schoolchildren after early inter­
vention with cow’s milk protein hydrolysates: 10-Year results from the German Infant
Nutritional Intervention (GINI) study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 131(6):1565-1573.
von Berg, A., S. Koletzko, B. Filipiak-Pittroff, J. Heinrich, C. P. Bauer, U. Kramer, B. Hoffmann,
and D. Berdel. 2013b. The German Infant Nutritional Intervention (GINI) study and for­
mulation issues. Reply. J Allergy Clin Immunol 132(3):770-771.
Wall, R., R. P. Ross, G. F. Fitzgerald, and C. Stanton. 2010. Fatty acids from fish: The antiinflammatory potential of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids. Nutr Rev 68(5):280-289.
Wawro, N., J. Heinrich, E. Thiering, J. Kratzsch, B. Schaaf, B. Hoffmann, I. Lehmann, C. P.
Bauer, S. Koletzko, A. von Berg, D. Berdel, and J. Linseisen. 2014. Serum 25(OH)D
concentrations and atopic diseases at age 10: Results from the GINIplus and LISAplus
birth cohort studies. BMC Pediatr 14:286.
Weisse, K., S. Winkler, F. Hirche, G. Herberth, D. Hinz, M. Bauer, S. Roder, U. RolleKampczyk, M. von Bergen, S. Olek, U. Sack, T. Richter, U. Diez, M. Borte, G. I. Stangl,
and I. Lehmann. 2013. Maternal and newborn vitamin D status and its impact on food
allergy development in the German LINA cohort study. Allergy 68(2):220-228.
West, C. E., J. Dunstan, S. McCarthy, J. Metcalfe, N. D’Vaz, S. Meldrum, W. H. Oddy, M. K.
Tulic, and S. L. Prescott. 2012. Associations between maternal antioxidant intakes in
pregnancy and infant allergic outcomes. Nutrients 4(11):1747-1758.
West, C. E., M. L. Hammarstrom, and O. Hernell. 2013. Probiotics in primary prevention of
allergic disease—Follow-up at 8-9 years of age. Allergy 68(8):1015-1020.
West, C. E., H. Renz, M. C. Jenmalm, A. L. Kozyrskyj, K. J. Allen, P. Vuillermin, and S. L.
Prescott. 2015. The gut microbiota and inflammatory noncommunicable diseases: Asso­
ciations and potentials for gut microbiota therapies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 135(1):3-13.
Wetzig, H., R. Schulz, U. Diez, O. Herbarth, B. Viehweg, and M. Borte. 2000. Associations be­
tween duration of breast-feeding, sensitization to hens’ eggs and eczema infantum in one
and two year old children at high risk of atopy. Int J Hyg Environ Health 203(1):17-21.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2003. Prevention of allergy and allergic asthma. Based
on the WHO/WAO meeting on the prevention of allergy and allergic asthma. Geneva,
Switzerland: WHO.
WHO. 2016. Infant and young child feeding. http://who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs342/en
(accessed June 5, 2016).
Wjst, M. 2008. Allergy risk of vitamin D supplements has been described in various settings.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 121(4):1065-1066; author reply 1066.
Wjst, M., and S. Dold. 1999. Genes, factor X, and allergens: What causes allergic diseases?
Allergy 54(7):757-759.
Woo, J. G., A. Assa’ad, A. B. Heizer, J. A. Bernstein, and G. K. Hershey. 2003. The –159 C→T
polymorphism of CD14 is associated with nonatopic asthma and food allergy. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 112(2):438-444.
Xu, B., M. R. Jarvelin, and J. Pekkanen. 2000. Body build and atopy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
105(2 Pt 1):393-394.
Zhang, Y., F. Collier, G. Naselli, R. Saffery, M. L. Tang, K. J. Allen, A. L. Ponsonby, L. C.
Harrison, and P. Vuillermin. 2016. Cord blood monocyte-derived inflammatory cytokines
suppress IL-2 and induce nonclassic “TH2-type” immunity associated with development
of food allergy. Sci Transl Med 8(321):321ra8.

6
Management in the Health Care Setting

Proper management in the health care setting begins with an appro­
priate diagnosis of food allergy so that the patient can be instructed on
specifically which foods can trigger allergic symptoms. Once a diagnosis
is established, management relies on educating the patient and family on
avoiding the allergen and preparing to treat allergic symptoms, including
severe allergic reactions (i.e., anaphylaxis) promptly and appropriately.
Additionally, daily management of food allergy carries potential nutritional,
social, and emotional ramifications that should be addressed. Achieving
these goals requires significant patient and family education and counseling.
Emerging approaches for treatment show promise for altering the threshold
of reactivity, making exposure to small amounts of the food less problem­
atic, and future treatments will ideally result in elimination of the allergy.
This chapter covers management of diagnosed food allergy from the
perspective of a health care setting and includes topics such as the impact
of food allergy on affected individuals and families and the current under­
standing of food allergy treatment. Dietary issues with regard to prevention
are discussed in Chapter 5. This chapter also highlights the importance of
educating health care providers about food allergy and management advice
for the home, public environments, and high-risk scenarios. From a devel­
opmental and ecological perspective, the instructions provided at the health
care setting represents only one aspect of successful management because
successful adherence depends on management and sensitivity toward food
allergy from all societal sectors, including families, schools, food service,
and the community. Chapter 7 focuses on management of food allergies in
227

228

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

other settings such as schools, restaurants, and travel, and on the safety of
manufactured products.
APPROACH TO LITERATURE REVIEW
The topics addressed in this chapter did not undergo individual system­
atic review or meta-analysis. The primary resources for discussion, findings,
conclusions, and recommendations were derived from various guidelines
(see Chapter 1, Table 1-1, for a description of the guidelines): the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases/National Institutes of Health
(NIAID/NIH)-supported Guidelines (Boyce et al., 2010) and its associated
literature reviews, the European Academy of Allergy & Clinical Immunol­
ogy (EEACI) Guidelines (Muraro et al., 2014a,b) and associated systematic
reviews (de Silva et al., 2014; Dhami et al., 2014), the American Academy
of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology (AAAAI) Guidelines (Sampson et al.,
2014); the AAAAI Practice parameter (Lieberman et al., 2015), and Ameri­
can Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Clinical Reports (Sicherer et al., 2007,
2010). Additional PubMed searches were performed to identify items in
the literature to supplement the discussion on specific topics, especially
for papers published after the aforementioned reports. Meta-analyses and
systematic reviews were selected when available.
ALLERGEN AVOIDANCE AND RECOGNITION
OF AND PREPAREDNESS TO TREAT ALLERGIC
REACTIONS AND ANAPHYLAXIS
General Principles of Management, Avoidance, Cross-Contact,
Hidden Ingredients, Routes of Exposure
The primary advice for managing a diagnosed food allergy, whether
immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated or non-IgE-mediated, is to avoid ingest­
ing the culprit food allergen(s) (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014b;
Sampson et al., 2014). Of course, no randomized clinical trials (RCTs) have
been conducted to evaluate this approach, but not ingesting the allergen is
a rational management strategy for a diagnosed food allergy. No evidence
exists that avoidance affects the natural course of atopic dermatitis, asthma,
or eosinophilic esophagitis (Allen et al., 2009; Boyce et al., 2010). Maternal
avoidance of a food allergen may be needed in some cases if the infant,
diagnosed with a food allergy, experiences reactions from the maternallyingested allergen while breastfeeding (Jarvinen et al., 1999; Lifschitz et al.,
1988; Monti et al., 2006).
Achieving avoidance of a food allergen entails numerous considerations
involved in obtaining or preparing allergen-safe foods. For example, cross­

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

229

contact is a term describing a situation where an unintended allergen may
be present in an otherwise allergen-free food because of contact between the
unsafe and safe food. Examples of cross-contact include having a knife used
in peanut butter placed into a jar of jelly, using a fryer with oil exposed to
fish and egg ingredients used for potatoes, and placing a spoon used to stir
a milk-containing soup into a milk-free one.
The possibility of hidden ingredients is also a concern (see also
Chapter 7). For example, an individual with food allergy may not have
expected that chili or spaghetti sauce may contain peanut flour, that pea­
nut butter may be used to seal the ends of an egg roll, or that “non-dairy”
creamers contain casein, the major allergenic protein in cow milk.
Avoiding ingestion of a food allergen requires patient education about
obtaining safe foods in numerous settings, for example reading labels on
packaged foods,1 asking before ordering in restaurants and food service,
and preparing safe meals at home. Standard cleaning procedures, such as
using wet wipes and washing hands with running water and soap, typically
suffice to remove allergen from surfaces. However, topical antibacterial
hand cleaning agents do not neutralize allergens (Perry et al., 2004). Inges­
tion contact with an allergen occurs from sharing utensils or straws or from
intimate kissing where saliva containing the allergen may transfer to the
allergic individual (Eriksson et al., 2003; Hallett et al., 2002; Maloney et
al., 2006). Young children may need supervision when around food aller­
gens to avoid taking or being fed the allergen, or having hand-to-mouth
transfer of food allergens.
The primary route of exposure that triggers serious reactions—for
example, severe anaphylaxis or fatal reactions—is through ingestion
(Fleischer et al., 2012; Sampson et al., 2014). Modest allergen contact
with intact skin is unlikely to trigger serious reactions (Simonte et al.,
2003; Wainstein et al., 2007), but transfer from hand to the mouth can be a
concern, and the eyelid may swell significantly with direct contact. Aerosol­
izing2 food proteins (e.g., from boiling milk, frying egg or fish, cooking with
wheat flours) may trigger reactions, often respiratory symptoms, depend­
ing on proximity, amount aerosolized, and patient-specific factors, such as
asthma and degree of sensitivity (Roberts et al., 2002). Aerosol exposure
can be a concern in occupational settings (e.g., “baker’s asthma”). Peanut
butter, an oily substance, does not aerosolize enough to trigger reactions
(Simonte et al., 2003).
1 The section on packaged foods below describes the current regulatory frameworks for
food labeling of packaged foods that attempt to inform consumers of the presence of an al­
lergen in a food.
2 Aerosolizing is the process or act of converting some physical substance into the form of
particles small and light enough to be carried on the air.

230

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

The complexities of avoidance management requires a proper diagno­
sis followed by a comprehensive approach to educating patients, families,
caregivers, and others on appropriate measures. Mistakes and subsequent
allergic reactions are common. A prospective study of 512 infants with
food allergy followed for a median of 36 months noted 1,171 reactions
among 367 children (Fleischer et al., 2012). Common reasons for reactions
included accidental exposure, label reading errors, and cross-contact, but
the study also noted some exposures were purposeful, suggesting they were
done presumably to test whether the allergy was active. Additionally, the
source of ingested foods during accidental exposure included siblings, rela­
tives, and other caregivers. This study reflects the many potential sources of
error in avoidance management and the need for comprehensive education.
A 2015 systematic review regarding unexpected allergic reactions in those
older than age 12 years (Versluis et al., 2015) identified 18 observational
and 6 qualitative studies. The authors noted that current knowledge about
the frequency of unexpected reactions is limited, that reactions can be
severe and fatal, and that most reactions were noted to have taken place at
home though other locations, such as restaurants and others’ homes, were
common. They also identified various labeling issues and risky behaviors
as problems and concluded that patient education and dietary instruction
are needed.
EDUCATING PATIENTS ABOUT ALLERGEN AVOIDANCE
This section presents several topics where health care providers should
provide advice to their patients with food allergy. Many of the topics relate
to allergen avoidance, the main advice given to patients. They include
strictness of allergen avoidance, avoidance and comorbidities, and concerns
about cross-reactive foods. These topics are covered to various degrees in
Boyce et al. (2010); Muraro et al. (2014b); and Sampson et al. (2014). The
topic of nonstrict avoidance is discussed in more detail in the review by
Kim and Sicherer (2010).
Strictness of Allergen Avoidance
Typically persons with a food allergy are advised to strictly avoid the
trigger food (Boyce et al., 2010; Kim and Sicherer, 2010; Muraro et al.,
2014b; Sampson et al., 2014). However, individuals with a mild allergy,
particularly allergies related to pollen-food allergy syndrome, may not need
to strictly avoid the trigger fruit or vegetable. Similarly, those with foodassociated, exercise-induced anaphylaxis may only need to avoid the identi­
fied trigger only in the hours before exercise. A majority of children with
cow milk or egg allergy are able to ingest extensively heated forms of these

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

231

foods, for example when baked into a muffin. Additionally, circumstantial
evidence from observational studies suggests that ingesting these forms does
not impede recovery from these allergies and may speed tolerance induction
(Kim et al., 2011; Leonard et al., 2012; Nowak-Wegrzyn et al., 2008; Tey
et al., 2012). For individuals with a high threshold of reactivity, allowing
ingestion of sub-threshold amounts of the allergen has not been studied.
Limited evidence from a study of young children suggests that an isolated
exposure to egg, milk, or peanut resulting in an allergic reaction does not
increase allergen-specific IgE responses (Sicherer et al., 2016). More studies
are needed to understand circumstances where nonstrict avoidance would
suffice. In some situations, nonstrict avoidance is an option that can be con­
sidered under medical guidance. For example, as presented in Chapter 7,
this committee recommends the implementation of a risk-based approach
for labeling foods with unintended allergens which, under medical consulta­
tion, should improve the ability of individuals with food allergy to decide
whether they can safely consume a specific packaged food.
Allergen Avoidance and Relationship to Comorbid
Asthma, Atopic Dermatitis, and Allergic Rhinitis
Food allergen avoidance is generally not recommended as a primary
means to address treatment of asthma, atopic dermatitis, or allergic rhi­
nitis. However, avoidance is warranted when a specific food allergy is
diagnosed in a patient with those diagnoses (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson
et al., 2014). If a food allergy is diagnosed, limited evidence suggests that
avoiding the allergen may improve atopic dermatitis (Agata et al., 1993;
Bath-Hextall et al., 2009; Boyce et al., 2010; Lever et al., 1998). Studies
have suggested that following extended elimination of a food that had
not previously caused serious reactions, for example only flare of atopic
dermatitis, re-exposure to the food could result in acute systemic allergic
reactions (Chang et al., 2016; David, 1984; Flinterman et al., 2006).
Although this observation raises caution, no RCTs have been performed
to confirm this association.
Concerns About Cross-Reactive Foods
Food with proteins that are homologous3 to a food protein to which
an individual is allergic may present a reaction risk (Boyce et al., 2010;
Sampson et al., 2014). For example, an individual with a peanut allergy
may be at higher risk for allergy to beans (e.g., soy) because both foods
3 Homology between proteins is defined in terms of shared ancestry and is typically inferred
from the similarity of their amino acid sequence.

232

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

are legumes. However, clinical cross-reactivity varies among families of
foods and also among individuals depending upon their allergy profile.
Unfortunately, testing has limited value because sensitization to foods with
homologous proteins, evidenced by positive skin prick tests (SPTs) or the
presence of food-specific IgE antibodies, is much more common than is clin­
ical allergy (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014; Sicherer, 2001) (see
Chapter 4 for a detailed discussion of testing). Foods with high likelihood
of clinically relevant cross-reactivity include milk from cows and goats; tree
nuts, specifically cashew with pistachio and walnut with pecan; various
fish with each other; and between crustacean shellfish, such as shrimp and
lobster. In contrast, grains and legumes have less co-allergy. Decisions about
avoiding related foods may rely also on factors such as concerns about
accidental exposure from misidentification or cross contact. For example,
an individual with food allergy who tolerates walnut but not cashew may
decide to avoid all tree nuts to avoid cross-contact or misidentification.
Therefore, advice about the need to avoid potentially cross-reactive foods is
individualized and may require extensive testing with oral food challenges
(OFCs). Adherence is, obviously, more difficult. Education of patients and
families about these concerns is required for proper management.
ADVICE ON ALLERGEN AVOIDANCE IN
VARIOUS SETTINGS OF CONCERN
Packaged Foods
Laws governing the labeling of allergens in packaged foods vary
by country (Akiyama et al., 2011; Gendel, 2012) and are described in
Chapter 7. Health care providers should discuss current labeling laws
in counseling those who have a diagnosed food allergy. The current U.S.
labeling law, the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of
2004, requires manufacturers to use plain English terms to identify milk,
egg, wheat, soy, peanut, tree nuts, fish, and crustacean shellfish ingredients.
These may be included in the ingredient list and/or in a separate “contains”
statement. Highly refined oils are exempt based on removal of protein by
the process. The individual name of the food is required for categorical
foods (e.g., walnut, cashew, shrimp, tuna, cod). Noncrustacean seafood,
such as clam, oyster, scallop, is not included in the laws. Foods that are
known to cause serious allergic reactions are not necessarily included on
the label, for example, sesame and mustard (Caballero et al., 2002; Dalal et
al., 2012) because they are not included in the U.S. list of priority allergens
(see Chapter 7).
In the United States and some other countries, when manufacturers
perceive the possibility of allergens being unintentionally included in the

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

233

product, they may voluntarily use precautionary or advisory terminology,
such as “may contain X,” “in a facility with X,” and other such terms.
Studies suggest varied risks with such products (Crotty and Taylor, 2010;
Decastelli et al., 2012; Ford et al., 2010; Hefle et al., 2007; Robertson et
al., 2013; Zurzolo et al., 2013) and consumers should be counseled that
the terms do not reflect degree of risk. As Chapter 7 concludes, labeling
laws help consumers to identify most, but not all, allergens, and advisory
labeling has resulted in an unregulated proliferation of warnings that are
not well understood by consumers or health care providers, and appears to
result in risk-taking behavior. For example, findings from a recent survey
administered in 16 countries suggest limited understanding among individu­
als with food allergy about food allergen thresholds (Marchisotto et al.,
2016). In addition to managing the risks from packaged foods by replac­
ing the current food allergen precautionary advisory labeling system, as
recommended in Chapter 7, risks from consuming packaged foods should
be communicated to individuals with food allergy and their caregivers by
effective counseling in the health care setting.
Management at Home
Management of food allergen avoidance in the home requires constant
vigilance regarding cross contact, label reading, and hidden ingredients.
Typical cleaning methods should remove allergens from utensils, dishes,
and surfaces. Depending on age and developmental ability, different safe­
guards may be needed to protect a child from ingesting the avoided aller­
gen. For example, allergens may need to be kept out of reach of younger
children who are not aware of the danger. Families may need to consider
keeping the food-allergic individual away from the allergen during food
preparation areas if aerosolization is likely (e.g., frying fish or eggs, boil­
ing milk, steaming lobster, preparing food with wheat flours or powdered
milk). Maintaining a continuous safe environment is challenging and time
consuming. Health care providers should review these issues with patients
and families.
Management in Food Service Settings and During Travel
People who are food allergic must navigate multiple issues when dining
away from home, including avoiding cross-contact and hidden ingredients
in foods served at food service establishments such as restaurants, ice
cream parlors, bakeries, grocery stores with prepared foods, and food carts
(see also Chapter 8). Informing the establishment about the allergy is the
patient’s or family’s responsibility, but the establishment also must be able
to take precautions to provide safe food to the public. Factors contributing

234

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

to risk could be the presence of allergens in the source ingredients or crosscontact with allergens at the buffets and food preparation areas.
It may be beneficial for the health care provider to understand and
review with patients that a variety of errors can occur in the restaurant set­
ting, whether from the consumer or the establishment’s personnel (Ahuja
and Sicherer, 2007; Furlong et al., 2001). Errors from the consumer could
be due to poor communication of the allergy, assumptions made by the
consumer about the safety of the foods, and selection of restaurants that
may pose additional challenges depending on their allergy (e.g., seafood
restaurant for an individual with shellfish allergy). Among 5,149 persons
in a self-report registry for peanut and tree nut allergy, composed mostly of
children, 13.7 percent reported reactions in food establishments (Furlong
et al., 2001). Following a survey of a random subgroup of 129, lack of
communication of the allergy was reported for 45 percent of the reactions.
Reported rationales included assuming visual inspection would suffice,
thinking the allergy was not too severe, and presuming the food should be
safe. These findings suggest a benefit for health care personnel in advising
patients with food allergy to openly and specifically discuss their allergy
with staff of food establishments.
Errors on the part of the restaurant personnel can include misunder­
standing of an allergy diagnosis compared with a less dangerous intolerance
or preference, poor communication within the establishment, staff failure to
prevent cross-contact or to know about hidden ingredients, among others
(Ahuja and Sicherer, 2007). Surveys of restaurant personnel in Brighton,
United Kingdom (Bailey et al., 2011) and New York City (Ahuja and
Sicherer, 2007) showed that restaurant personnel, including chefs, may
indicate confidence in providing a safe meal for a food-allergic consumer,
but have knowledge deficits about allergy, cross-contact, and general food
allergy management. These findings suggest that health care providers
should discuss strategies such as encouraging patients with food allergy
to review cross contact and hidden ingredients with staff when obtaining
restaurant meals (i.e., educate or confirm knowledge of staff).
Travel presents additional potential obstacles for persons with food
allergy (Barnett et al., 2012). A lack of global uniform guidelines requires
consumers with food allergy to navigate different regulations, or regions
with no regulations, internationally. Language barriers may prevent safe
communication. Travel to remote regions raises concerns about obtaining
safe food and managing a reaction. Several studies have reported aller­
gic reactions on airplanes based on self-report of having unintentionally
ingested or been exposed to allergens (Comstock et al., 2008; Greenhawt
et al., 2013; Sicherer et al., 1999). These issues, highlighted further in
Chapter 8, suggest that individuals and families with food allergy be coun­
seled to consider their allergies when traveling and to call ahead to notify

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

235

transportation services, carry medications, ensure safe food is available,
and, for younger children, inspect and wipe seating areas for residual food
before the child has contact with the space.
Management in Schools and Child Care Centers
Supervision of children and procedures to provide safe foods in early
care and education settings, schools, and summer camp settings is required
to avoid allergen exposure and to recognize and promptly treat allergic or
anaphylactic reactions. A number of recommendations and guidelines have
been developed that focus on advice to school personnel, health care pro­
viders, patients, and families (CDC, 2013; Eldredge and Schellhase, 2012;
Ford et al., 2014; Leo and Clark, 2012; Muraro et al., 2014d; Robinson
and Ficca, 2012; Sheetz et al., 2004; Sicherer et al., 2010; Vale et al., 2015;
Young et al., 2009). A discussion about approaches to providing a safe
experience for children with food allergies when away from home, includ­
ing the responsibilities of the school staff, is provided in Chapter 8. This
chapter focuses on the responsibilities and challenges of the health care
provider, parents, and students. These issues also can extend to additional
settings away from home, such as religious events, sports, afterschool clubs
and camps, among other supervised settings for children (Sampson et al.,
2014).
For the child with possible food allergy who attends a school set­
ting, the responsibilities of the child’s physician or health care provider
may include confirming the diagnosis, providing a written emergency care
plan, providing advice about general management to the family and school
personnel, and giving necessary medication prescriptions. As reviewed in
Chapter 4, ascertaining a diagnosis and whether a child has a potentially
life-threatening food allergy can be difficult. Briefly, these elements for
diagnosis include deciphering a true allergy, judging its potential severity,
and considering comorbid conditions such as asthma.
The physician or health care provider may work with the patient and
family to notify the school about a potentially life-threatening food allergy,
including providing a written plan, often referred to as an Emergency
Action or Emergency Care Plan for Anaphylaxis or Allergy and Anaphy­
laxis. Unfortunately, no standard, evidence-based plans have been devel­
oped and so numerous forms with many different approaches are used.
This may represent a significant gap in providing standard care. Survey
studies suggest that an insufficient number of students with food allergy
have a management plan, or that the plan may not be followed (Ewan and
Clark, 2001; Gupta et al., 2014). No comprehensive studies have been
conducted that provide evidence for a validated, brief written emergency
plan for individual or general use. Various organizations or schools have

236

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

developed plans. Studies have identified key factors that might be included
on standardized written plans, or compared plans for determination of
preferences, or identified variations in using these plans, but systematic
studies are lacking (Banerjee et al., 2007; Ewan and Clark, 2001; Powers
et al., 2007; Weiss et al., 2004; Worth et al., 2010). Key features typically
include the date, the child’s name, recent weight, identifying information
(child’s picture, if provided), specifics about the food allergy or allergies,
emergency medications and doses, descriptions of possible symptoms and
related treatment instructions, advice to activate emergency services, and
family contact information. Development of evidence-based, universal plans
could potentially improve understanding and emergency care.
A number of factors must be considered when developing emergency
plans for medical management of anaphylaxis and, more specifically, for
treatment in a school setting. For example, regarding management in gen­
eral, no diagnostic test exists to predict or confirm anaphylaxis, and specific
symptoms may vary, resulting in treatment quandaries. Although diagnostic
features of anaphylaxis have been published, (Sampson et al., 2006b), it
is prudent to inject epinephrine (adrenaline) before observing symptoms
diagnostic of anaphylaxis. Therefore, the decision to inject epinephrine
may vary based on the patient’s history, foods involved, and likelihood of
an ingestion of the avoided food at the onset of mild symptoms that could
be attributed to other causes and are not (yet) anaphylaxis (i.e., throat
discomfort may be an early symptom of a viral infection or an initial
symptoms of food allergy). For example, if an allergen was ingested that
previously caused anaphylaxis, it may be advisable to inject epinephrine
at the time of first symptoms, or if an allergen was definitely ingested and
previously known to have caused severe anaphylaxis, it may be advisable
to inject epinephrine before symptoms occur (AAAAI BOD, 1998; Sicherer
et al., 2010). The supervising adult may need to differentiate a mild aller­
gic symptom from anaphylaxis, deciding when to administer epinephrine.
This can be difficult, even for experienced professionals. Current advice
emphasizes educating parents and school personnel that (1) antihistamines
cannot be depended on to treat anaphylaxis but are adjunctive therapies to
treat an allergic reaction, (2) inhaled bronchodilators must not be depended
on to treat anaphylaxis but may be given for respiratory reactions, and (3)
intramuscular epinephrine is safe and, if a possibility of a severe allergic
reaction exists, should be administered (side effects are mild and may
include temporary fast heart rate, jitteriness, flushing, or paleness) (Sicherer
et al., 2007, 2010). Administration of medications in U.S. schools has
been addressed in general guidance documents (Council on School Health,
2009). However, no studies provide sufficient evidence for validation of the
options discussed above.
Given the complexity of food allergy diagnosis and emergency treat­

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

237

ment, the physician may need to consider whether a licensed health care
professional is available to assist the child. When one is not available, a
plan that is different from one when a professional is involved must be
developed. For example, a licensed health professional may administer an
antihistamine for mild allergic symptoms and observe for progression of
symptoms before administering epinephrine, whereas a nonlicensed, not
medically trained individual may not be expected to make this kind of med­
ical or nursing assessment. In this case, the advice may be to promptly give
the epinephrine by auto-injector and call for activation of emergency medi­
cal services immediately. No studies have addressed the various approaches
upon which to develop best practices in this regard.
In addition to the above issues of medical management, the physi­
cian or health care professional should address age-specific concerns (for
example, the inability of preschool age children to self-monitor taking
unsafe foods or the potential risk-taking activities of adolescents), potential
risks, bullying, and general management. Medical identification jewelry is
encouraged. Avoidance measures should be discussed and are reviewed in
the CDC Voluntary Guidelines for Managing Food Allergies in Schools and
Early Care and Education Programs (CDC, 2013). Avoidance advice may
vary by age, allergy, developmental abilities, nutritional status, socioeco­
nomic status, and other factors, and counseling may be adjusted according
to the needs of the child and the circumstances of the school. However, little
information is available to inform best practices on avoidance (Banejee et
al., 2007; Cicutto et al., 2012; Vale et al., 2015; Worth et al., 2010). Fami­
lies and patients should be educated about how and when to administer
self-injectable epinephrine, the importance of avoidance strategies (e.g., no
food sharing), when to have children notify an adult of any symptoms or
if they may have eaten an unsafe food. The diagnosis, treatment plan, and
prescriptions should be reviewed periodically and updated at least yearly.
Families and schools also need to be alert to the expiration dates on epi­
nephrine auto-injectors.
Finally, the physician and family will need to provide the school with
a list of foods to be avoided and possible substitutions. Some school food
programs may require physician-recommended substitutions. Additional
issues from the community perspective are discussed in Chapter 8 of this
report.
Educational Needs
Although it is incumbent upon health care providers to educate patients
and families, these providers have noted deficits in understanding food
allergy and anaphylaxis management, as described in Chapter 2. Manag­
ing food allergy requires educating all those who are involved in measures

238

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

associated with avoiding and treating allergic reactions. However, numer­
ous studies suggest that many different stakeholders, including physicians,
have deficits in their understanding of these basic concepts (Desjardins et
al., 2013; Morawetz et al., 2014). For example, in an Internet survey of
medical professionals, only 23 percent recognized risk factors for anaphy­
laxis and only 55 percent identified a case of anaphylaxis that had no hives
(Wang et al., 2014). Another Web-based study of 407 primary care physi­
cians noted a fair allergy and anaphylaxis knowledge base but specific defi­
cits were noted, such as only 23 percent recognizing that cheese is unsafe
for those with milk allergy and fewer than 30 percent indicating comfort
with laboratory tests or caring for children with food allergies (Gupta et
al., 2010b). Surveys of emergency department management of anaphylaxis
suggest serious undertreatment of anaphylaxis and lack of referral (Clark et
al., 2004). When allergy referral is achieved, previously unknown triggers
are often identified (Campbell et al., 2015b).
Surveys of the general public (Gupta et al., 2009) and parents of
children with food allergy (Gupta et al., 2010a) also show a variety of
knowledge deficits. Studies have identified errors in using epinephrine autoinjectors among patients and health care providers (Arga et al., 2011;
Brown et al., 2013; Guerlain et al., 2010; Sicherer et al., 2000). A Canadian
survey of 184 respondents of caregivers of children who had experienced
a first allergic reaction within the past year identified gaps in the caregiv­
ers having received food allergy and anaphylaxis education and coping
strategies for fear and anxiety (Abdurrahman et al., 2013). In a qualitative
manner, they found three primary areas of deficit: lack of receiving informa­
tion on recognizing and managing food allergy–related reactions, long wait
times to see an allergist, and significant family anxiety. Surveys of school
nurses revealed the need for better understanding of emergency plan devel­
opment, staff education, and delegation and avoidance measures (Carlisle
et al., 2010). Surveys of pediatric dietitians (Groetch et al., 2010; Maslin
et al., 2014) revealed that they considered they had moderate knowledge
for educating families and evaluating safe foods and low knowledge for
creating diagnostic food challenges. Knowledge deficits about food allergy
also have been noted among child care providers (Greiwe et al., 2015),
emergency response providers (Jacobsen et al., 2012), restaurant personnel
(Ahuja and Sicherer, 2007; Bailey et al., 2011), and teachers (Ercan et al.,
2012; Polloni et al., 2013). Overall, stakeholders are currently insufficiently
educated and seek more information on food allergy.
Studies suggest that educating health care providers is valuable and
that patients and their families may benefit from being directed to various
educational resources. A number of studies report successful educational
materials or programs for various stakeholders, including in-person and
online programs, many of which have not been validated (Bailey et al.,

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

239

2014; Bansal et al., 2005; Camargo et al., 2007; Cavanaugh and Strickland,
2011; Chokshi et al., 2015; Desai et al., 2015; Hernandez-Trujillo and
Simons, 2013; Reeves et al., 2015; Rosen et al., 2014; Sasaki et al., 2015;
Shah et al., 2013; van Os-Medendorp et al., 2015; Wahl et al., 2015;
White et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2008). One study found that providing simple
guidelines improved anaphylaxis management in the emergency department
(Desai et al., 2015). In one program that health care professionals can use
with parents of children with food allergy (Sicherer et al., 2012), significant
improvements were seen in the correct number of auto-injector activation
steps, comfort with using the auto-injector, knowledge test scores, and the
annualized rate of allergic reactions fell on average from 1.77 (historical)
the year prior, to 0.42 (P<0.001) after the program. A number of smartphone and tablet applications are also emerging for managing food allergy
(Cuervo-Pardo et al., 2015).
Food anaphylaxis can occur in any setting but proper emergency man­
agement can resolve a life-threatening occurrence. Therefore, the public,
particularly first responders and aiders, need to be prepared to assist in such
food-related severe reactions. There is not, however, a national standard­
ized curriculum that includes required elements for emergency care train­
ing. Overall, food allergy anaphylaxis is not included in training curricula
of organizations that offer various certifications on emergency training or
specialized training for professionals such as pediatric specialization for
child care providers or training for Emergency Medical Service personnel.
In summary, education of stakeholders is key for food allergy man­
agement because knowledge deficits are significant. There is a clear unmet
need for education. Evidence indicates that adopting a multidisciplinary
clinical approach and providing educational materials may improve
knowledge, correct use of epinephrine, and reduce reactions. Although
various educational programs are available or in development, most have
not been extensively studied. Studies on widespread implementation also
are lacking.
High-Risk Groups
Several guidelines (e.g., Muraro et al., 2014b; Sampson et al., 2014)
emphasize that certain factors may increase the risk for anaphylaxis.
Examples of factors that may increase risks include coexisting asthma,
allergies to specific foods (e.g., peanut, tree nuts), degree of sensitivity
and extent of eliciting factors (e.g., illness, exercise, medications, alcohol).
The relative contributions of all of these are not established. Risk factors
identified in case series of fatal food allergic reactions include adolescence
or young adult age group, comorbid asthma, ingestion of peanut or tree
nuts (although fatal reactions can occur from other allergens, such as

240

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

milk), delayed treatment with epinephrine, lack of skin symptoms (perhaps
resulting in delayed recognition and treatment), and previously diagnosed
food allergy (Bock et al., 2001, 2007; Pumphrey, 2000; Pumphrey and
Gowland, 2007; Sampson et al., 1992). The AAAAI Guidelines (Sampson
et al., 2014) suggests discussing self-care management techniques espe­
cially with high-risk patients, described as adolescents, young adults, and
patients with asthma.
Adolescents and young adults, including those in college, may be at
higher risk of fatal food-induced anaphylaxis for a variety of reasons
(Akeson et al., 2007; Greenhawt et al., 2009; Macadam et al., 2012;
Marrs and Lack, 2013; Monks et al., 2010; Mullins, 2003; Noimark et
al., 2012; Sampson et al., 2006a). They may not understand or recognize,
or may deny symptoms indicating anaphylaxis. For example, in a survey
of 174 adolescents with food allergy, 61 percent did not report having
anaphylaxis but described symptoms such as throat swelling, trouble
breathing, and loss of consciousness (Sampson et al., 2006a). In this same
study, risk-taking behaviors included not always carrying epinephrine (39
percent), purposefully ingesting unsafe food (54 percent), and ingesting
foods with advisory labeling for their allergen (42 percent). The motiva­
tion behind risk-taking behaviors may include poor understanding of risk,
convenience, not wanting to feel different from peers, bullying, lack of
recollection of allergic reactions, success having survived self-resolving
reactions without the need for treatment, fear of injections, overreli­
ance on emergency medications on hand to justify unsafe eating behav­
iors, and other behavioral and psychosocial factors (Akeson et al., 2007;
Greenhawt et al., 2009; Macadam et al., 2012; MacKenzie et al., 2010;
Marrs and Lack, 2013; Monks et al., 2010; Noimark et al., 2012; Samp­
son et al., 2006a). Potential for interventions also are noted in several
studies. In one study, 68 percent of adolescents with food allergy indicated
a belief that educating their friends would make living with food allergy
easier (Sampson et al., 2006a). In another study of adolescents with food
allergy, adherence to self-care was reported by 16 percent of participants,
and was more likely if the adolescents belonged to an allergy support
group (odds ratio [OR]: 2.54; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.04-6.20),
had a written management plan (OR: 3.22; 95% CI: 1.18-8.81), per­
ceived having a more severe allergy (OR: 1.24; 95% CI: 1.01-1.52), and
perceived fewer management barriers (OR: 0.87; 95% CI: 0.79-0.96)
(Jones et al., 2015). Approaches for providing care and better educa­
tion have not been systematically studied, but suggestions have included
targeting knowledge, preparedness, empowerment, and beliefs (Marrs
and Lack, 2013).

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

241

Advice on Allergens in Nonfood Items and Alcoholic Beverages
Allergens in Pet Foods, Cosmetics, and Topical Products
A variety of noningested products include allergens, which requires
caution on the part of consumers when allergen disclosures may not be
included. Examples include pet foods containing milk, soy, fish, or nut
ingredients, and lotions with nut ingredients. Most of these products are
not ingested, so the risk of anaphylaxis would be relatively low but studies
have not delineated the risks. These products have no labeling requirements
relating to food allergens. Physicians may discuss these potential risks with
patients who have food allergy, especially with toddlers who may otherwise
have access to these products and could ingest them accidentally.
Allergens in Vaccines, Medications, and Dietary Supplements
Physicians and patients with food allergy must consider potential food
allergen exposures in vaccines, medications, and dietary supplement prod­
ucts (e.g., vitamins, probiotics), which are not regulated by labeling laws.
Also, excipients (i.e., substances added to medications to improve various
characteristics) may be food or derived from foods (Kelso, 2014). These
include milk proteins; soy derivatives; oils from sesame, peanut, fish or
soy; and beef or fish gelatin. The medications involved include vaccines;
anesthetics; and oral, topical, and injected medications. With perhaps the
exception of gelatin, reactions appear to be rare overall, likely because
little residual protein is included in the final preparation of these items. The
specific risk for each medication is not known.
Vaccines also may contain food allergens, such as egg protein or gela­
tin. Expert opinion based on many studies suggests that the yearly influenza
vaccination and the measles, mumps, and rubella vaccines should not be
deferred based on egg allergy (e.g., Turner et al., 2015). In contrast, the
yellow fever and rabies vaccines should not be given to persons with severe
egg allergy unless testing with the vaccine is undertaken first (Kelso et al.,
2012, 2013).
Allergens in Alcoholic Beverages
Allergic or allergic-like reactions can occur from alcoholic beverages.
These products are not included in allergen labeling laws and counseling
of patients may be warranted. However, the literature on the allergenicity
of alcoholic beverages is sparse. Persons with alcohol dehydrogenase defi­
ciency may experience dose-related symptoms that mimic allergy, including
flushing, nausea, vomiting, and sometimes wheezing. Sulfites, often found

242

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

in wine, may induce asthma symptoms. Wines may be clarified by processes
that use allergens such as egg, but the final product may not likely contain
residual protein (Rolland et al., 2008). Beer may have residual proteins
from barley or other grains that can trigger reactions (Quercia et al., 2012).
Distilled alcohol should be free from protein. Many alcoholic beverages
are made from potential allergens, for example amaretto from almonds,
frangelico from hazelnuts, and Irish cream from milk, but the residual
allergenicity of these products has not been studied.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OF ALLERGIC REACTIONS
The physician must counsel patients with food allergy, and their fami­
lies, on recognizing and treating food-induced anaphylaxis. The following
discusses some of the challenges involved in diagnosis and treatment of
anaphylaxis at the level of first aid and physician care. The previous sec­
tion “Management in Schools and Child Care Centers” includes additional
information regarding written emergency plans and emergency medical
identification jewelry.
Definition of Anaphylaxis, Diagnosis, and Differential Diagnosis
Anaphylaxis has been described as a severe, life-threatening, general­
ized or systemic hypersensitivity reaction (Muraro et al., 2014a). Lifethreatening breathing, airway, or circulatory problems may occur and skin
and mucosal changes usually, although not always, occur. A consensus
definition was proposed in 2006, describing anaphylaxis as “a serious
allergic reaction that is rapid in onset and may cause death” (Sampson et
al., 2006b, p. 392). Diagnostic criteria based on consensus were published
in 2006 (Sampson et al., 2006b) and some validation has been performed
(Campbell et al., 2012; Harduar-Morano et al., 2010). Diagnosis may need
to differentiate anaphylaxis from fainting, cardiac events, mild allergic reac­
tions, asthma, choking, panic attacks, and many other ailments. However,
no simple tests exist to confirm anaphylaxis or to predict those at risk.
Serum tryptase, a mediator released from mast cells, may not be increased
with food-induced anaphylaxis, although severity of the episode and dif­
ferences from baseline may be relevant (De Schryver et al., 2016; Lin et al.,
2000a; Sahiner et al., 2014; Sala-Cunill et al., 2013; Wongkaewpothong
et al., 2014). Histamine measurements are difficult to obtain. As reviewed
previously, allergy tests are not good predictors of severity of reactions.
Overall, anaphylaxis is a clinical diagnosis and no rapid diagnostic test is
available.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

243

Nature of Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis involves more than one organ system (e.g., skin, respira­
tory tract, and/or gastrointestinal [GI] tract) (Boyce et al., 2010). The
skin is involved in 80 to 90 percent of episodes, respiratory symptoms in
up to 70 percent, GI in up to 40 percent, and cardiovascular symptoms
in up to 35 percent (Boyce et al., 2010; Dhami et al., 2014; Lieberman
et al., 2015; Muraro et al., 2014a; Sampson et al., 2014). Symptoms
include flushing, pruritus, hives (urticaria), nasal congestion and rhinor­
rhea, throat itching and swelling (edema), choking, wheezing, coughing,
trouble breathing, altered breathing sounds or trouble speaking, cramp­
ing abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, high or slow
heart rate, sleepiness, confusion, loss of consciousness, anxiety, feeling
of doom, seizure, and uterine cramps.
Food-induced anaphylaxis typically occurs within minutes to several
hours of ingestion of the food (but may be longer for mammalian meat,
alpha-gal-related reactions (Boyce et al., 2010; Sampson et al., 2014;
Tripathi et al., 2015). The reaction usually develops and resolves completely
within hours, but a biphasic course has been described where symptoms
resolve but recur hours later, a phenomenon that is described for 1 to
20 percent of cases (Alqurashi et al., 2015; Ellis and Day, 2007; Lee and
Greenes, 2000; Lee et al., 2015b; Lieberman, 2005; Mehr et al., 2009;
Sampson et al., 1992). Biphasic reactions may be more likely with severe
or undertreated reactions, but are unpredictable, and observation in an
emergency department for at least 4 to 6 hours is recommended (Boyce et
al., 2010). Rarely, symptoms can last for many hours or days (Sampson
et al., 1992). Deaths have been reported from 30 minutes to 2 hours after
exposure (Bock et al., 2001, 2007; Sampson et al., 1992). No biomarkers
are available that adequately predict severity or whether a biphasic reaction
will develop. Reactions could be worse, milder, or similar from time to time,
presumably because of many variables including overall sensitivity, amount
of allergen ingested, and other factors.
Risk Factors (Asthma, Certain Foods, Cofactors) and Risk Assessment
A number of comorbid diseases may affect the severity and treatment
response of anaphylaxis (Boyce et al., 2010; Dhami et al., 2014; Lieberman
et al., 2015; Muraro et al., 2014a; Sampson et al., 2014). Asthma is a
significant risk factor for death, especially in adolescents and young adults
(Bock et al., 2001, 2007; Pumphrey, 2000; Pumphrey and Gowland, 2007;
Sampson et al., 1992). Cardiac disease is a risk factor for middle-aged or
older adults (Pumphrey, 2000; Pumphrey and Gowland, 2007). Allergies
to some foods are associated with more severe reactions (e.g., peanut, tree

244

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

nuts, milk, fish, shellfish, seeds, and egg) than others (fruits and vegetables).
Additional risks for more severe reactions include underlying mastocytosis
and lung disease diagnosis. Various medications may affect response to
treatment, including beta-adrenergic antagonists, angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors, and alpha adrenergic blockers. No simple means exist to
predict the severity of reactions or to clearly identify an individual at risk.
Medical Treatment of Anaphylaxis
Epinephrine, typically prescribed as auto-injectors for self-injection for
first aid management, is first-line therapy for food-induced anaphylaxis and
is recommended to be injected intramuscularly (anterolateral thigh into the
vastus lateralis muscle) (Boyce et al., 2010; Lieberman et al., 2015; Muraro
et al., 2014a; Sampson et al., 2014). Epinephrine should be administered
promptly for anaphylaxis and when clinical features are likely to evolve
into anaphylaxis (AAAAI BOD, 1994; Muraro et al., 2014a). Delay in
providing therapy with epinephrine is associated with increased risk of
death and morbidity. Epinephrine has a variety of actions that improve
breathing and circulation and may reduce the release of additional inflam­
matory mediators. Treating anaphylaxis with epinephrine has no absolute
contraindications.
A Cochrane Systematic Review (Sheikh et al., 2012a) of the effective­
ness of epinephrine auto-injectors in relieving respiratory, cardiovascular,
and other symptoms during anaphylaxis in the community setting sought
randomized or quasi-randomized trials comparing auto-injectors to no
intervention or other interventions and found no qualifying studies out of
1,328 references that were reviewed. Nonetheless, the conclusion was to
recommend epinephrine auto-injectors as the most effective first-line treat­
ment for anaphylaxis in the community, with a recommendation for trials
comparing different doses and devices as well as syringe and ampule.
According to the NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines, a prescription for
an epinephrine auto-injector, typically two doses, should be given to those
who have experienced anaphylaxis as well as patients with diagnosed food
allergy who have asthma and those with allergy to foods that typically
cause severe reactions (e.g., peanut, tree nuts, fish, shellfish). A prescription
for anyone with a diagnosed food allergy may be considered because subse­
quent reaction severity is hard to predict (Boyce et al., 2010). The EAACI
Anaphylaxis Guidelines (Muraro et al., 2014b) additionally comment upon
a prescription being indicated when a person has had previous mild to mod­
erate symptoms from trace food exposure, mild to moderate symptoms to a
food and travel to areas remote from medical care is planned, and for teen­
agers or young adults with food allergy (excluding oral allergy syndrome).
The AAAAI Practice Parameter on anaphylaxis discusses additional con­

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

245

siderations, such as allergy to mustard, peach, or apple, for those patients
in Mediterranean regions (who tend to have more severe reactions to these
fruits), and people having past reactions with throat tightness, those hav­
ing food allergy and airway anatomy that predisposes to obstruction, or
those having contact allergic reactions to specific foods. This document
also concluded that physician discretion is needed (Lieberman et al., 2015).
Consensus has emerged on the use of premeasured auto-injector doses
of 0.15 mg for those weighing 16.5 (7.5 kg) up to 55 pounds (25 kg),
and a dose of 0.3 mg for those 55 pounds and greater (Boyce et al., 2010;
Muraro et al., 2014a; Sampson et al., 2014). Controversy exists regarding
the auto-injectors use for infants weighing less than 7.5 kg (or less than
10 kg in some guidelines [Boyce et al., 2010, Sampson et al., 2014]) and
for individuals with obesity (Sicherer et al., 2007; Simons et al., 2014,
2015). Although dosing at 0.01 mg/kg epinephrine intramuscularly has
been recommended, the ideal dose has not been determined through studies
(Lieberman et al., 2015). Additional studies and potentially a wider range
of fixed-dose auto-injectors may be beneficial.
First aid management also includes activating emergency services (call­
ing for help, dialing 911 or equivalent), evaluating airway breathing and
circulation, and providing cardiorespiratory resuscitation, if needed. It
may be beneficial to place the patient in a recumbent position with the legs
elevated if tolerated (although bringing a patient to a standing position may
result in death, and caution is needed during transport (Pumphrey, 2003).
The patient may require more than one dose of intramuscular epinephrine,
as studies suggest this may occur in 10 to 20 percent of cases (Jarvinen
et al., 2008; Oren et al., 2007). The intramuscular epinephrine dose can
be repeated (e.g., in approximately 5 minutes from the last dose), as war­
ranted by symptoms (Muraro et al., 2014a). Side effects of epinephrine may
include restlessness, headache, dizziness, palpitations, pallor, flushing, and
tremor. Rarely, epinephrine can lead to severe side effects, such as myo­
cardial infarction or intracranial hemorrhage, but these severe side effects
almost exclusively occur from overdose, which is more likely if errors in
intravenous administration occur, rather than intramuscular injection from
auto-injectors (Campbell et al., 2015a).
Additional treatment of anaphylaxis is considered adjunctive to epi­
nephrine and may include bronchodilator medications, H1 and H2 anti­
histamines, corticosteroids, vasopressors, glucagon, atropine, supplemental
oxygen, intravenous fluids, and patient positioning (Boyce et al., 2010;
Lieberman et al., 2015; Muraro et al., 2014a; Sampson et al., 2014). Most
of these adjunctive therapies would be available following first aid manage­
ment and would be administered by emergency personnel or by emergency
department staff.
Systemic antihistamines are often used during anaphylaxis. Systematic

246

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

reviews to assess the benefit or harm of H1 antihistamines for the treatment
of anaphylaxis have been conducted. Randomized and quasi-randomized
controlled trials to compare this therapy with placebo or no intervention
have been sought. However, no studies have satisfied inclusion criteria
(Nurmatov et al., 2014b; Sheikh et al., 2007). The medications presum­
ably help to relieve cutaneous symptoms but no studies regarding effect
on other symptoms of anaphylaxes or progression of reactions have been
conducted. Combination treatment with H1 and H2 antihistamines may
have additional efficacy compared to H1 antihistamines alone for cutane­
ous symptoms (Lin et al., 2000b; Runge et al., 1992). Oral (in preference
to intravenous) administration is recommended for relief of cutaneous
symptoms (Ellis and Brown, 2013; Muraro et al., 2014a) to avoid hypotension related to rapid intravenous administration. The onset of action of
antihistamines (e.g., liquids, rapid disintegrating tablets) is approximately
30 minutes. Studies to determine the benefit or harm of antihistamines in
anaphylaxis would be useful.
Oral or intravenous glucocorticoids are often used in anaphylaxis to
theoretically prevent protracted symptoms or late onset of symptoms and
also to address concomitant asthma. A systematic review was undertaken
with the intention to perform a meta-analysis to assess benefits and harms
of glucocorticoid treatment during anaphylaxis, but no randomized or
quasi-randomized controlled trials comparing glucocorticoids to any con­
trol were identified and so no meta-analysis could be undertaken (Choo
et al., 2012). Therefore, therapy with glucocorticoids, which have a slow
onset of action, are used in anaphylaxis without clear evidence and are
based on expert opinion (Boyce et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014a; Sampson
et al., 2014). Studies on the utility of glucocorticoids in anaphylaxis could
inform therapeutic approaches.
No consensus in the literature exists on the optimal time for observa­
tion of the patient who has experienced anaphylaxis, although 4 to 6 hours
has been suggested, or longer if the patient experienced hypotension (Boyce
et al., 2010; Muraro et al., 2014a; Sampson et al., 2014).
Post-Anaphylaxis Long-Term Management
Based on current guidelines, discharge planning or long-term manage­
ment should include a written anaphylaxis emergency action plan, encour­
aging medical identification jewelry, and having epinephrine auto-injectors
(typically two) always available, a plan for monitoring auto-injector expira­
tion, a plan for arranging further evaluation as needed, printed information
about anaphylaxis and its treatment, and consideration for referral to spe­
cialist for further evaluation. It also is recommended to have instructions on
the proper use of epinephrine auto-injectors and indications for use, advice

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

247

about allergen avoidance, and additional information regarding a dietitian
consult and support groups (Boyce et al., 2010; Lieberman et al., 2015;
Muraro et al., 2014a; Sampson et al., 2014). As reviewed above, discharge
and long-term management of patients with food allergy who are at risk
for anaphylaxis has some potential pitfalls. Nutritional and psychological
concerns are described below.
NUTRITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
Adequate nutrition is important for normal child development and
growth. When allergen avoidance is the one recommendation to minimize
the risk of an allergic reaction, children could end up deficient on specific
nutrients or calories if attention to their nutrition is not considered.
The NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines suggest nutritional counseling
and regular growth monitoring for all children with food allergies (Boyce
et al., 2010) and the EAACI Guideline suggested that, ideally, the patient
would receive proper counseling by a dietitian with specific competence
in food allergy, recognizing this is particularly important for infants and
children and may vary by age and foods avoided (Muraro et al., 2014b).
The most common allergenic foods contain nutrients whose removal
may reduce diet quality (i.e., lead to nutrient deficiencies) and, therefore,
may be detrimental to health, particularly for an infant or child. For
example, cow milk has protein, fat, calcium, vitamin D, and riboflavin;
wheat in fortified cereals contains carbohydrates, iron, thymine, niacin,
riboflavin, and folate; egg includes protein, fat, iron, and riboflavin; and
fish and shellfish are sources of protein, fat, and omega-3 fatty acids. When
cow milk is avoided, substitutions are typically needed to account for lost
nutrients (Fiocchi et al., 2010). For example, an infant or toddler who does
not use cow milk may require breast milk or a human milk substitute, and
older toddlers may require a calcium supplement and/or fortified alterna­
tive beverages, such as soy milk or rice, almond, oat, or coconut beverages,
depending on other components of the diet and as tolerated. However, these
beverages are not equivalent to cow milk in terms of fat, protein, calories,
and other essential nutrients (Groetch et al., 2013). Specifically, an infant
with a diagnosed cow milk allergy will typically tolerate formulas approved
for use in these circumstances, such as extensively hydrolyzed casein–based
or amino acid–based formula, or soy formula, as medically necessary fol­
lowing a diagnostic evaluation. However, partially hydrolyzed milk–based
formula is not typically appropriate for an infant with a diagnosed cow
milk allergy (Lee et al., 2015a). Infants with food allergy may have nutri­
tional concerns related to their elimination diets or to underlying chronic
illness. For example atopic dermatitis or GI inflammation can interfere

248

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

with nutrient absorption or result in increased caloric needs (Jarvinen et
al., 2013).
No RCTs have addressed whether food allergen avoidance affects
growth and nutritional status of infants and children. Multiple studies,
primarily observational and cross-sectional, suggest that food allergy may
be associated with impaired growth (Cho et al., 2011; Christie et al., 2002;
Flammarion et al., 2011; Hobbs et al., 2015; Isolauri et al., 1998; Mehta
et al., 2014; Meyer et al., 2012, 2014; Mori et al., 2015; Mukaida et al.,
2010; Nachshon et al., 2014; Vieira et al., 2010). It has particularly been
noted that growth may be impaired in those avoiding cow milk (Hobbs et
al., 2015; Isolauri et al., 1998; Mehta et al., 2014; Mukaida et al., 2010;
Tiainen et al., 1995). For example, Tiainen et al. (1995) compared 18 chil­
dren (mean age 2 years, range 1 to 3.5 years) with cow milk allergy and 20
healthy controls and found that although total energy intake between the
two groups did not differ, the children with milk allergy had lower protein
and higher fat intake compared to controls, and the allergic children also
had a lower height for age percentile (–0.6 versus 0.2 SD units; P<0.05).
Long-term outcomes for those on a childhood milk avoidance diet can
include increased risk of reduced bone mineral density and increased risk
of early osteoporosis (Nachshon et al., 2014). A small (N=39) prospective
study from the United Kingdom found that milk avoidance in early life can
have a long-term effect on food intake and preferences (Maslin et al., 2016).
Having multiple food allergies appears to put children at increased
risk of decreased growth, due to the reduced food and total energy intake
(Cho et al., 2011; Christie et al., 2002; Flammarion et al., 2011; Hobbs
et al., 2015; Meyer et al., 2012, 2014; Mukaida et al., 2010; Vieira et al.,
2010). For example, Christie et al. compared children with food allergy to
healthy controls and found that children with two or more food allergies
were shorter than those with one, and children with cow milk or mul­
tiple food allergies were less likely to consume sufficient dietary calcium
(Christie et al., 2002). Meyer et al. noted that children with food allergies
were more underweight than the general UK population, which was linked
to the number of foods excluded (Meyer et al., 2014). However, they also
noted cases of obesity despite dietary elimination. A systematic review of
nutrient intake and growth in children with multiple IgE-mediated food
allergies identified six studies and concluded that “children with multiple
food allergies have a higher risk of impaired growth and may have a higher
risk of inadequate nutrient intake than children without food allergies”
(Sova et al., 2013, p. 669). Although data are limited (Berni Canani et al.,
2014; Christie et al., 2002), dietary counseling can potentially improve
macro and micro nutrient intake and growth outcomes without evidence
of inducing overweight status. Evidence-based specific dietary guidance for
children with food allergy is lacking (Groetch et al., 2013; Meyer et al.,

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

249

2012). However, the data suggest that by individualizing dietary counseling,
dietary intakes and nutritional status can be improved and growth impair­
ment may be prevented.
QUALITY OF LIFE AND MENTAL HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
Daily management of food allergy is focused on avoiding trigger foods
and recognizing and managing allergic reactions, some of which are lifethreatening. These considerations practically affect the routine of daily
living and also carry psychological burdens that can result in anxiety and
stress. Measurement of health-related quality of life (HRQL) helps deter­
mine the impact of disease on an individual, which may vary among indi­
viduals even if disease severity is similar. Tools to measure HRQL may be
generic or disease specific. Generic instruments allow comparison between
disorders, while disease-specific instruments are more sensitive for measur­
ing the burden of disease and identifying changes caused by interventions.
A systematic review was undertaken to identify validated instruments
specific to food allergy disease (Salvilla et al., 2014). Seventeen eligible
studies were retrieved and seven disease specific HRQL instruments were
subjected to detail quality appraisal. These seven were found to have robust
psychometric properties (Cohen et al., 2004; DunnGalvin et al., 2008;
Flokstra-de Blok et al., 2008, 2009a,b; MacKenzie et al., 2012; Resnick et
al., 2010) and to be suitable for use in children, adolescents, parents and
caregivers, and adults. The authors also concluded that further work is
required to understand clinically important differences in score appraisal
of patients with food allergy. Using this systematic review, guidelines were
developed for using specific instruments based on the type of food allergy,
research or clinical applications, inclusion or exclusion of comorbidities,
patient age, language and cultural issues, the preferred respondent, and
target population (Muraro et al., 2014c). This review pointed out that the
instruments have been used in research settings only to provide quantita­
tive information on the HRQL of patients with IgE-mediated food allergy
and to assess the effect of interventions and determine outcomes. Studies to
recommend use of these instruments at the individual patient level are insuf­
ficient. Additionally, the review offered a number of research recommenda­
tions, including a need to: determine optimum methods of administration,
frequency, and interpretation; identify which instruments, if any, are valid
to guide clinical practice of individual patients; determine efficacy of the
instruments for evaluating medical and technological advances, patient sat­
isfaction and quality of care, and health and regulatory policy; include these
instruments to explain different pathways in the development, expression,
and impact of chronic diseases; articulate norms for age, sex, and country
or culture; explain the relationship between responses to both proxy and

250

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

self-report measures; develop optimum methods for evaluating measures in
patients with comorbid conditions; and, determine how quality-adjusted
life years for food allergy can be developed to help inform policy.
Aside from validated HRQL instruments, the practical emotional con­
cerns of daily management of food allergies can result in distress. Indeed,
the NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines recommends that patients with food
allergy and their caregivers be given information on food allergen avoid­
ance and emergency management that is age and culturally appropriate
because management can have substantial daily consequences, including
anxiety and diminished quality of life (Boyce et al., 2010). Food-specific
HRQL instruments generally query on issues such as holiday plans, res­
taurants, social activities, time for preparing meals or other meal-related
events, taking precautions, troubles in having to carry medications, worry
about health issues, not being able to get help for a reaction, other’s lack
of understanding about the allergy, attending school or work activities
safely, having a normal life, anxiety, and worry about the allergy or reac­
tions (Cohen et al., 2004; DunnGalvin et al., 2008; Flokstra-de Blok et al.,
2008, 2009a,b; MacKenzie et al., 2012; Resnick et al., 2010). The degree
of impact on HRQL can vary based on knowledge of food allergies, age,
having had experiences such as emergency room visit for anaphylaxis, an
injection of epinephrine, or multiple food allergies, or allergies to specific
foods (e.g., milk or egg compared to peanut or tree nut), and the impact
can be complex due to interactions among various factors (Springston et
al., 2010; Ward and Greenhawt, 2015; Wassenberg et al., 2012).
Various factors may affect the distress, anxiety, and psychological
aspects of a food allergy diagnosis and management. Additionally, the
impact may vary based on age, role, and time living with a diagnosis. Com­
pared to mothers of children without chronic illness, mothers of children
with food allergy have increased anxiety and stress (Lau et al., 2014). For
example, a study of families with a child having peanut allergy revealed that
mothers compared to fathers reported lower psychological and physical
quality of life and more stress and anxiety (King et al., 2009). This study
also found that children with food allergy had greater separation anxiety
than their siblings. Another study noted that mothers of children with food
allergy were more empowered than fathers of children with food allergy,
but empowerment was not associated with higher HRQL (Warren et al.,
2015). One study found that maternal anxiety and a child’s attitude toward
food allergy were associated with child distress for children ages 8 to 17
years (Lebovidge et al., 2009). Another study found that child anxiety and
parental stress significantly predicted parental report of their child’s HRQL,
and that child anxiety, parenting stress, length of diagnosis, and receiving
epinephrine predicted self-reported HRQL (Roy and Roberts, 2011). A
study using various scales to determine anxiety and depression found that

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

251

among parents being evaluated for a first-time allergy clinic appointment
for suspected food allergy in their child, 33 percent reported mild to severe
anxiety and 18 percent reported depression, with no significant change 1
month after the visit (Knibb and Semper, 2013).
Studies have focused on teens and young adults as well. A small quali­
tative study of adolescents and their parents found that having a child
with anaphylaxis can have a significant long-term psychological impact
on the parents, and in some cases, this anxiety may be transferred to
the adolescents (Akeson et al., 2007). In a large study of adolescents
(N=1,420) followed longitudinally, having food allergy was associated with
more symptoms of separation and generalized anxiety, attention deficit
and hyperactivity disorder, and anorexia nervosa. Over time, adolescents
with food allergy experienced increases in generalized anxiety disorder and
depression, but having food allergy was not associated with a higher likeli­
hood of having a diagnosed psychiatric disorder (Shanahan et al., 2014).
An online study of 86 food-allergic and 344 healthy adults ages 18 to 22
years evaluated autonomy, anxiety, depression, and perception of parental
behavior. The study indicated that, although food allergic young adults did
not differ from healthy ones, those who experienced anaphylaxis described
their disease as more severe, were more worried, and indicated their par­
ents as more protective then those who had not experienced anaphylaxis
(Herbert and Dahlquist, 2008). Additionally, for adolescents and young
adults, having a food allergy may be associated with dating anxiety, inter­
ference with physical intimacy, and fear of a negative evaluation by peers
(Hullmann et al., 2012).
Bullying has been another focus of study among psychosocial aspects
of food allergy. Episodes of bullying appear to be more common among
children with food allergy compared to peers and can take the form of
verbal and physical events (Lieberman et al., 2010). Bullying is significantly
associated with decreased quality of life and increased distress in parents
and children. Parents often may not know about their child being bullied
(Shemesh et al., 2013). When parents were aware of bullying, the child’s
quality of life was better and distress was reduced. Food-related bullying
often persists over time, although it is less likely to continue if parents
intervene (Annunziato et al., 2014). The AAAAI Guidelines specifically
suggests that physicians inquire about behavioral changes because of food
allergy–related bullying (Sampson et al., 2014).
Overall, the relationship of a chronic disease such as food allergy and
psychosocial problems is complex. A systematic review and meta-analysis
of 43 studies suggested a positive association between psychosocial factors
and future atopic disorders and current atopic disorders and future poor
mental health, but studies of food allergy were insufficient to comment on
this disease separately (Chida et al., 2008). Determinants of food allergy–

252

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

related cognition, emotion, and behavior are complex and understudied
(DunnGalvin et al., 2009).
Interventions pertaining to reducing the psychosocial impact of food
allergy are few. It appears that food allergy interventions themselves can
result in improvement. For example, measures of food-specific HRQOL
showed improvement for those on desensitization therapy in small or
uncontrolled studies (Arasi et al., 2014; Carraro et al., 2012; Factor et
al., 2012; Otani et al., 2014). Also, anxiety may decrease and HRQL may
improve following a diagnostic OFC, whether the outcome confirms an
allergy or not (Franxman et al., 2015; Knibb et al., 2012; Soller et al., 2014;
van der Velde et al., 2012; Zijlstra et al., 2010). However, no comprehen­
sive, evidence-based protocols exist for the clinical management of psy­
chosocial concerns related to food allergy, and studies are few. Availability
of a 24-hour helpline for expert management improved quality of life for
participants randomized to this intervention (Kelleher et al., 2013). A pilot
study of a telephone-based intervention teaching parents self-regulation for
chronic disease management resulted in improvement in some components
of HRQL (Baptist et al., 2012). Data to understand the value of support
groups for food allergy are limited (Sharma et al., 2012).
Referral to a mental health professional would presumably be of value,
if indicated, to improve psychosocial health concerns. Unfortunately, one
study of mental health screening of families with food allergy failed to result
in a greater consultation rate with a mental health professional compared
to a referral by the patient’s allergist (Shemesh et al., 2015). An expert
review on the topic of addressing the psychosocial aspect of food allergy
on a patient-level basis suggested that medical providers can validate feel­
ings, normalize the challenge of balancing management with participation
in daily activities, and provide education about food allergy and its psy­
chosocial impact, with referral to a mental health expert when indicated
(Herbert et al., 2016).
In conclusion, food allergy may affect different aspects of mental health
and HRQL. Health professionals should address these issues. However,
more information is needed to refine understanding about identification,
prevention, and management of these issues.
TREATMENT MODALITIES UNDER INVESTIGATION
The following summarizes approaches under investigation to treat food
allergy. This is not meant to be a comprehensive review of risks and benefits
of these approaches, nor a compendium of all approaches under study, but
rather an overview with summaries of expert reports and suggested addi­
tional references. The committee did not make an assessment in regard to

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

253

which treatment modalities have more promise in the future nor where the
research gaps exist.
A number of food allergy treatment strategies are under investigation.
Examples that are furthest along in study and are allergen-specific include
oral, sublingual, and epicutaneous immunotherapy.
Oral immunotherapy (OIT) involves ingesting the food allergen in
gradually increasing amounts. Protocols typically begin with ingestion of
trace amounts, building up to a small dose on a first day and then increasing
the dose, which is taken daily, on a biweekly basis toward a daily “main­
tenance” dose. Sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) takes a similar approach
but the allergen is retained for a period under the tongue and much lower
doses are used compared to OIT. Epicutaneous immunotherapy (EPIT)
involves placement of a membrane impregnated with allergen on the skin.
These therapies are often evaluated in context of promoting “desensitiza­
tion” to the targeted food allergen. That is, these treatment approaches
may raise the threshold of reactivity while the therapy is in progress, while
cessation of therapy may result in loss of protection. A curative therapy
would not depend upon daily treatments to maintain a threshold where the
food can be ingested without concerns for dose ingested or other factors
that may alter the safe ingestion of the food (e.g., concomitant exercise,
illness). Approaches that are not allergen-specific also have been suggested.
For example, omalizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody against
IgE that is approved for use in recalcitrant allergic asthma and for chronic
hives. It may increase the threshold of reactivity to allergens and may, in
co-administration with OIT, allow more rapid dosing with fewer symptoms
(Begin et al., 2014; Schneider et al., 2013; Wood et al., 2015). Studies with
a similar agent suggested an increased threshold to peanut during oral food
challenges (Leung et al., 2003).
The 2010 NIAID/NIH-supported Guidelines concluded that allergenspecific immunotherapy is not recommended, and also did not recommend
immunotherapy with cross-reactive allergens (i.e., pollen allergens to treat
oral allergy syndrome) (Boyce et al., 2010). The 2014 EAACI Guidelines
concluded that allergen-specific immunotherapy is promising, but is associ­
ated with risks, including anaphylaxis and is not recommended for routine
clinical use (Muraro et al., 2014b). These Guidelines (p. 1019) also stated
that “the use of anti-IgE alone or in combination with specific immuno­
therapy is currently not recommended . . . although it represents a prom­
ising treatment modality.” In addition, the 2010 NIAID/NIH-supported
Guidelines and the EACCI Guidelines both recommend not using pollen
immunotherapy to primarily treat food allergy. The AAAAI Guidelines
similarly concluded that immunotherapeutic approaches such as OIT show
promise, but are not ready for implementation in clinical practice because

254

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

of inadequate evidence of therapeutic benefit over risks (Sampson et al.,
2014).
The field of allergen-specific immunotherapy is rapidly progressing. A
number of systematic reviews and meta-analyses have addressed the utility
of immunotherapy (primarily OIT and SLIT) for food allergy. A 2012 metaanalysis of milk OIT identified five trials. The authors noted the poor qual­
ity of the trials and concluded that treatment could lead to desensitization
in a majority of individuals. Although most were mild, a major drawback
was the frequency of side effects (Yeung et al., 2012). A 2014 systematic
review and meta-analysis of milk oral OIT identified six qualifying articles
and concluded that it was effective for treating IgE-mediated cow milk
allergy because significantly more patients were desensitized on treatment
compared to those on an avoidance diet. The treatment was considered rea­
sonably safe because side effects were mild to moderate and intramuscular
epinephrine was rarely required (Martorell Calatayud et al., 2014). A 2012
review and meta-analysis of peanut OIT (Sheikh et al., 2012b) identified six
qualifying studies with 85 participants, but given the case series design of
all the studies, they were considered to have high risk of bias.4 The authors
noted suggestive evidence that treatment could increase the threshold for
many participants but that adverse reactions were common. Although most
were minor, some were potentially life-threatening. They concluded that the
treatment was promising for short- or medium-term management of care­
fully selected patients, but that more robust studies were needed and that
OIT should not be administered outside of carefully designed clinical trials.
A 2014 meta-analysis (Sun et al., 2014) of RCTs of peanut OIT and SLIT
identified three studies with a total of 86 participants. These immunothera­
pies were determined to have a positive effect on peanut allergy (OR: 38.44;
95% CI: 6-246). The authors cautioned that the findings were based on a
small number of trials and larger, well-designed and double-blind RCTs are
needed. A 2013 review of pediatric SLIT (Larenas-Linnemann et al., 2013)
concluded that food OIT was more promising than SLIT, but few studies
were included. A 2014 meta-analysis (Nurmatov et al., 2014a) identified 21
eligible trials of OIT or SLIT to foods. The meta-analysis revealed a lower
risk of reactions on treatment (risk ratio [RR]: 0.21; 95% CI: 0.12-0.38).
Additionally, SPT responses significantly decreased (mean difference: –2.96
millimeters [mm]; 95% CI: –4.48 to –1.45), and allergen-specific IgG4
concentrations increased by an average of 19.9 (95% CI: 17.1-22.6) μg/ml.
Safety data showed an increased risk of local oral-pharyngeal and gastro­
intestinal adverse reactions with treatment (RR: 1.47; 95% CI: 1.11-1.95).
4 Case series design studies are considered to be vulnerable to selection bias because they,
for example, might draw their patients from a particular population and might not represent
the wider population.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

255

Also, a non-significant increased average risk of systemic adverse reactions
occurred with treatment (RR: 1.08; 95% CI: 0.97-1.19). The authors
concluded that OIT can induce immunomodulatory changes and thereby
promote desensitization. However, based on limited evidence on long-term
efficacy and safety, as well as cost-effectiveness, they concluded that the
treatment should not currently be used outside of experimental conditions.
Overall, these reviews and meta-analyses are in agreement with the
guidelines noted above. However, OIT is being used clinically by a num­
ber of practice settings with various motivations (Greenhawt and Vickery,
2015; Pajno et al., 2014). Phase 3 studies are currently under way for OIT
and EPIT. Numerous other approaches have been tried or are in develop­
ment, such as a panoply of biologics, immune adjuvants, modified protein
vaccines, traditional Chinese medicine practices, probiotics, and many oth­
ers (Bauer et al., 2015; Keet and Wood, 2014; Kumar et al., 2013; Le and
Burks, 2014; Nermes et al., 2013; Nowak-Wegrzyn and Sampson, 2011;
Oyoshi et al., 2014; Sato et al., 2014; Senti and Kundig, 2016). Clearly,
many strategies can be pursued to address treatment of food allergy.
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
Management in the health care setting involves education about the
daily strategies that patients need to follow to avoid allergen ingestion and
to recognize and treat reactions promptly. Although these management
approaches begin in the health care setting, success often requires involve­
ment at the community level (see Chapter 8). Allergen avoidance, usually
strict avoidance even of trace amounts of allergen, is the primary means of
management. This requires significant education and caution throughout
the day. In addition, it relies upon others in the community to provide
safety, seriously affects quality of life, and increases anxiety. Counseling
about avoidance involves emphasizing key concerns, such as cross-contact
and hidden ingredients and discussing foods related to the diagnosed aller­
gens, which may need to be avoided upon a full food allergy evaluation.
Counseling is directed to managing food allergies at home, reading labels
(and knowing about products that are not included in mandatory label­
ing laws), asking questions when eating in restaurants and during travel,
and, for children, avoiding food allergens when away from home (e.g., at
schools, camp, or when with friends and relatives). Such counseling should
address common pitfalls that have been identified in a variety of studies.
However, data to be able to provide individualized risk assessments upon
which to base instructions regarding avoidance and emergency management
are limited. Also, limited programs exist for educating patients, caregivers,
and other stakeholders, with few evidence-based programs to ensure effec­
tiveness, and limited information exists on implementation. Adolescents

256

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

and young adults appear to be at increased risk for fatal anaphylaxis, and
their risk-taking behavior has been identified as a possible cause.
Emergency management depends upon recognizing a reaction and
promptly instituting therapy. Epinephrine is the primary treatment for
anaphylaxis, with auto-injectors having fixed doses used for first-aid care.
However, dosing of epinephrine has not been extensively studied and
current auto-injectors may not provide appropriate doses for infants or
individuals with obesity. Anaphylaxis is often underrecognized and undertreated. A number of risk factors have been identified for anaphylaxis, but
there are no means to reliably predict severity of anaphylaxis. Medications
used as primary and adjunctive therapy for anaphylaxis have not been
studied. Post-anaphylaxis care includes observation in the medical setting
to ensure resolution of symptoms, prescription of medications, education
on avoidance and management, and possibly referral for additional testing
and management. However, numerous pitfalls to these strategies have been
identified.
Avoidance diets, particularly ones involving milk or multiple foods,
can affect nutrition and growth and dietitian intervention is warranted.
However, data on best practices are limited. Considering the significant
impact of food allergy on quality of life and emotional status, information
on how best to approach these issues is severely lacking. In addition, data
on aspects of management for adults are sparse.
Emerging studies show promising results for desensitizing specific aller­
gens but more information is needed about the safest and most effective
approaches and how they may be individualized based on patients allergies
and needs.
The committee did not wish to repeat all reasonable management
recommendations that are already noted in professional guidelines, com­
mittee reports, and practice parameters. However, the committee empha­
sizes some key research recommendations in alignment with such reports
where the study findings suggest areas of high need and frequent deficits
in management.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Numerous clinical guidelines and parameters provide advice for health
care providers and patients and their caregivers on diagnosing, prevent­
ing, and managing food allergy. The committee generally supports current
guidelines and U.S. practice parameters for food allergy management and
the committee emphasizes those areas where improvements would lead to
significant changes in the quality of life of patients and their caregivers,
such as training and education of the general public and all stakeholders.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

Public Health Authorities, Health Care Providers,
and Their Patients and Caregivers
The committee recommends that the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention work with other public health authorities to plan
and initiate a public health campaign for the general public, indi­
viduals with food allergy, and all relevant stakeholders to increase
awareness and empathy as well as to dispel misconceptions about
food allergy and its management.
For example, as part of that campaign and taking advantage
of the popularity of digital media among the public, particularly
children and adolescents, public health authorities could develop
effective media engagement programs. To plan for this campaign
and develop media programs, public health authorities could con­
duct formative research with all potential audiences.
The committee recommends that public health authorities, such
as the National Institutes of Health and the World Health Orga­
nization, and professional organizations, such as the American
Academy of Pediatrics; the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma
& Immunology; American Academy of Family Physicians; and the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, regularly update guidelines
on diagnosis, prevention, and management of food allergy based
on strong scientific evidence, as emerging scientific data become
available.
For example, current evidence is insufficient to associate any of
the following behaviors with prevention of food allergy: food aller­
gen avoidance diets for pregnant or lactating women, prolonged
allergen avoidance in infancy, vaginal delivery, breastfeeding, infant
formulas containing extensively or partially hydrolyzed protein,
and supplementation with specific nutrients (e.g., vitamin D, folate,
fatty acids) in children or adults.
The committee recommends that medical schools as well as resi­
dency and fellowship programs and other relevant schools include
training for health care providers in the management of food
allergy and anaphylaxis. Health care providers, including dietitians
and mental health professionals, also should receive training on
approaches to counseling patients and their caregivers. Counsel­
ing training is envisioned to be provided, in part, by professional
organizations through various means, including the Internet.

257

258

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

The following elements of food allergy training are appropriate
for all health care providers, including emergency medical techni­
cians, emergency room staff, nurses, dietitians, and others:
•

•

Emergency management. This includes training to recog­
nize and manage an anaphylaxis emergency, such as the use
of intramuscular epinephrine as a first line of emergency
management for episodes of anaphylaxis.
Counseling on food allergy management and anaphylaxis.
This includes identifying food allergies as well as man­
aging and treating them in various settings (e.g., home,
school, restaurants), as well as emergency management of
anaphylaxis.

As appropriate, physicians and other health care providers also
may receive training to provide the following:
•

•

Nutrition counseling. This includes discussion of safe and
nutritionally adequate avoidance diets to individuals with
food allergies, particularly children and their caregivers.
The training also could include offering referral to a dieti­
tian when needed and as part of reimbursable care. In
addition, dietitians may receive training in providing indi­
vidualized dietary advice to people with food allergies and
their caregivers.
Psychosocial counseling. This includes identifying and dis­
cussing with patients and caregivers psychosocial concerns
(e.g., bullying), validation of feelings, and balancing man­
agement with participation in daily activities. Training also
could include offering referral to a mental health profes­
sional when needed and as part of reimbursable care. In
addition, mental health professionals may receive train­
ing in counseling individuals with food allergy and their
caregivers.

The committee recommends that health care providers counsel
patients and their caregivers on food allergies following the most
recent food allergy guidelines and emphasizing the need to take
age-appropriate responsibility for managing their food allergy.
Counseling is particularly important for those at high risk of food
allergy and severe food allergy reactions, such as adolescents,
young adults, and those with both food allergy and asthma.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

259

The committee recommends that health care providers and others
use intramuscular epinephrine (adrenaline) in all infants, children,
and adults as a first line of emergency management for episodes
of food allergy anaphylaxis. The Food and Drug Administration
should evaluate the need for, and, if indicated, industry should
develop an auto-injector with 0.075 mg epinephrine specifically
designed for use in infants.
Current auto-injectors have 0.15 mg or 0.30 mg epinephrine,
which is not suitable for infants. Consensus is currently lacking on
first aid management using available auto-injectors when managing
infants. A dose of 0.075 mg from an auto-injector could fill this
gap. Labeling the auto-injectors in a standard manner to differenti­
ate doses also could be beneficial.
Training First Responders and First Aiders
The committee recommends that organizations, such as the Ameri­
can Red Cross or the National Safety Council, who provide emer­
gency training (e.g., first aid training, basic life support) to the
general public and to first responders and first aid personnel in
various professions and workplaces, include food allergy and ana­
phylaxis management in their curricula.
RESEARCH NEEDS
Health Care Settings
Food allergy management primarily requires avoiding the trigger
allergen(s), but this approach requires extreme care; knowledge of crosscontact, hidden ingredients, and the effect of processing; and knowledge
of ingredients through label reading and other methods. It is prone to
accidents resulting in allergic reactions. Numerous obstacles arise for
food-allergic consumers attempting to obtain safe meals outside the home.
Surveys among individuals with food allergy, caregivers, and health care
providers reveal deficiencies in food allergy knowledge and concerns about
accidents, especially among adolescents and young adults. Only limited pro­
grams are available for educating individuals, caregivers, and health care
providers on strategies to obtain and provide safe meals outside the home,
with few validated programs and limited information on implementation.
In addition, validated, evidence-based dietary guidance is lacking for those
avoiding allergens, such as milk or multiple foods. Knowledge about poten­
tial interventions that health professionals could use to improve individual

260

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

psychosocial status, such as to improve quality of life or alleviate anxiety,
also is lacking.
In regard to management, some areas of research need further study.
For example, no means are currently available to reliably predict sever­
ity of anaphylaxis, which would be valuable for health care providers,
individuals with food allergy, and their caregivers. In terms of managing
anaphylaxis, underuse of epinephrine, the primary treatment for ana­
phylaxis, is common but the reasons are unknown. In addition, the fixed
doses of epinephrine in auto-injectors may not be appropriate for infants
or for individuals with obesity. Also, medications used as primary and
adjunctive therapy for anaphylaxis (e.g., epinephrine dosing, bronchodila­
tors, antihistamines, corticosteroids) have not been studied. Standardized
emergency plans for individuals that can be used by caregivers at home or
school also do not exist.
To address those gaps in knowledge, the following research areas
should be pursued on all affected populations (ages, sexes, ethnicities,
comorbidities, socioeconomic strata), especially on underrepresented
populations:

•

•

•
•
•
•

Determine the effectiveness of evidence-based guidelines and
evidence-based educational programs on food allergy management,
including avoidance of allergens and emergency management of
allergic reactions and anaphylaxis, for health care providers and
for patients, particularly for high-risk groups.
Assess the following management issues:
o the effectiveness of approaches other than strict allergen
avoidance
o the role of food allergy in other chronic allergic conditions
o the identification of means to recognize clinically relevant ver­
sus nonrelevant allergen cross-reactivity
Identify risk factors and biomarkers of food-induced anaphylaxis,
particularly to identify individuals at high risk of severe reactions.
Assess the safety and efficacy of adjunctive therapies for anaphylaxis,
especially bronchodilators, antihistamines, and corticosteroids.
Devise safe and effective therapies for food allergy, including those
that can induce long-term desensitization and tolerance (i.e., sus­
tained remission), and ideally a true cure.
Improve understanding of the nutritional needs of persons on food
allergen avoidance diets, how best to determine their need for dieti­
tian evaluation/management, and how to develop evidence-based
medical nutrition therapy.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

•
•
•

•
•

261

Evaluate whether consulting with a dietitian or a mental health
professional improves quality of life and understand barriers to
referring patients to dietitians or mental health professionals.
Explore the best means to identify and intervene about psychoso­
cial concerns associated with managing food allergy.
Identify best practices for providing a uniform written emergency
action plan for anaphylaxis. Consider using the recent American
Academy of Pediatrics guidelines as the reference for a best practice
study.
Determine the proper dose of epinephrine in infants less than 10
kg and in individuals with obesity.
Characterize risks associated with non-oral allergen exposures
(e.g., skin-exposure and inhalation).
REFERENCES

AAAAI BOD (American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology Board of Directors).
1994. The use of epinephrine in the treatment of anaphylaxis. AAAI Board of Directors.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 94(4):666-668.
AAAAI BOD. 1998. Anaphylaxis in schools and other childcare settings. AAAAI Board of
Directors. American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 102(2):173-176.
Abdurrahman, Z. B., M. Kastner, C. Wurman, L. Harada, L. Bantock, H. Cruickshank, and
S. Waserman. 2013. Experiencing a first food allergic reaction: A survey of parent and
caregiver perspectives. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 9(1):18.
Agata, H., N. Kondo, O. Fukutomi, S. Shinoda, and T. Orii. 1993. Effect of elimination diets
on food-specific IgE antibodies and lymphocyte proliferative responses to food antigens
in atopic dermatitis patients exhibiting sensitivity to food allergens. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 91(2):668-679.
Ahuja, R., and S. H. Sicherer. 2007. Food-allergy management from the perspective of restau­
rant and food establishment personnel. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 98(4):344-348.
Akeson, N., A. Worth, and A. Sheikh. 2007. The psychosocial impact of anaphylaxis on young
people and their parents. Clin Exp Allergy 37(8):1213-1220.
Akiyama, H., T. Imai, and M. Ebisawa. 2011. Japan food allergen labeling regulation—
History and evaluation. Adv Food Nutr Res 62:139-171.
Allen, C. W., A. S. Kemp, and D. E. Campbell. 2009. Dietary advice, dietary adherence and
the acquisition of tolerance in egg-allergic children: A 5-yr follow-up. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 20(3):213-218.
Alqurashi, W., I. Stiell, K. Chan, G. Neto, A. Alsadoon, and G. Wells. 2015. Epidemiology
and clinical predictors of biphasic reactions in children with anaphylaxis. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 115(3):217-223.
Annunziato, R. A., M. Rubes, M. A. Ambrose, C. Mullarkey, E. Shemesh, and S. H. Sicherer.
2014. Longitudinal evaluation of food allergy-related bullying. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract 2(5):639-641.
Arasi, S., I. M. Otani, E. Klingbeil, P. Begin, C. Kearney, T. L. Dominguez, W. M. Block, G.
O’Riordan, and K. C. Nadeau. 2014. Two year effects of food allergen immunotherapy
on quality of life in caregivers of children with food allergies. Allergy Asthma Clin Im­
munol 10(1):57.

262

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Arga, M., A. Bakirtas, F. Catal, O. Derinoz, K. Harmanci, C. H. Razi, S. Ergocen, M. S.
Demirsoy, and I. Turktas. 2011. Training of trainers on epinephrine autoinjector use.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 22(6):590-593.
Bailey, S., R. Albardiaz, A. J. Frew, and H. Smith. 2011. Restaurant staff’s knowledge of
anaphylaxis and dietary care of people with allergies. Clin Exp Allergy 41(5):713-717.
Bailey, S., T. Billmeier Kindratt, H. Smith, and D. Reading. 2014. Food allergy training event
for restaurant staff; a pilot evaluation. Clin Transl Allergy 4:26.
Banerjee, D. K., R. S. Kagan, E. Turnbull, L. Joseph, Y. St Pierre, C. Dufresne, K. GrayDonald, and A. E. Clarke. 2007. Peanut-free guidelines reduce school lunch peanut
contents. Arch Dis Child 92(11):980-982.
Bansal, P. J., R. Marsh, B. Patel, and M. C. Tobin. 2005. Recognition, evaluation, and treat­
ment of anaphylaxis in the child care setting. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 94(1):55-59.
Baptist, A. P., S. I. Dever, M. J. Greenhawt, N. Polmear-Swendris, M. S. McMorris, and N. M.
Clark. 2012. A self-regulation intervention can improve quality of life for families with
food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 130(1):263-265.
Barnett, J., N. Botting, M. H. Gowland, and J. S. Lucas. 2012. The strategies that peanut
and nut-allergic consumers employ to remain safe when travelling abroad. Clin Transl
Allergy 2(1):12.
Bath-Hextall, F., F. M. Delamere, and H. C. Williams. 2009. Dietary exclusions for im­
proving established atopic eczema in adults and children: Systematic review. Allergy
64(2):258-264.
Bauer, R. N., M. Manohar, A. M. Singh, D. C. Jay, and K. C. Nadeau. 2015. The future of
biologics: Applications for food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 135(2):312-323.
Begin, P., T. Dominguez, S. P. Wilson, L. Bacal, A. Mehrotra, B. Kausch, A. Trela, M.
Tavassoli, E. Hoyte, G. O’Riordan, A. Blakemore, S. Seki, R. G. Hamilton, and K. C.
Nadeau. 2014. Phase 1 results of safety and tolerability in a rush oral immunotherapy
protocol to multiple foods using Omalizumab. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 10(1):7.
Berni Canani, R., L. Leone, E. D’Auria, E. Riva, R. Nocerino, S. Ruotolo, G. Terrin, L.
Cosenza, M. Di Costanzo, A. Passariello, A. Coruzzo, C. Agostoni, M. Giovannini, and
R. Troncone. 2014. The effects of dietary counseling on children with food allergy: A
prospective, multicenter intervention study. J Acad Nutr Diet 114(9):1432-1439.
Bock, S. A., A. Munoz-Furlong, and H. A. Sampson. 2001. Fatalities due to anaphylactic
reactions to foods. J Allergy Clin Immunol 107(1):191-193.
Bock, S. A., A. Munoz-Furlong, and H. A. Sampson. 2007. Further fatalities caused by
anaphylactic reactions to food, 2001-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 119(4):1016-1018.
Boyce, J. A., A. Assa’ad, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, H. A. Sampson, R. A. Wood, M. Plaut,
S. F. Cooper, M. J. Fenton, S. H. Arshad, S. L. Bahna, L. A. Beck, C. Byrd-Bredbenner,
C. A. Camargo, Jr., L. Eichenfield, G. T. Furuta, J. M. Hanifin, C. Jones, M. Kraft, B. D.
Levy, P. Lieberman, S. Luccioli, K. M. McCall, L. C. Schneider, R. A. Simon, F. E. Simons,
S. J. Teach, B. P. Yawn, and J. M. Schwaninger. 2010. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: Report of the NIAID-sponsored expert
panel. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(6 Suppl):S1-S58.
Brown, J., D. Tuthill, M. Alfaham, and E. Spear. 2013. A randomized maternal evaluation of
epinephrine autoinjection devices. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 24(2):173-177.
Caballero, T., M. S. San-Martin, M. A. Padial, J. Contreras, R. Cabanas, P. Barranco, and
M. C. Lopez-Serrano. 2002. Clinical characteristics of patients with mustard hypersen­
sitivity. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 89(2):166-171.
Camargo, C. A., Jr., S. Clark, M. S. Kaplan, P. Lieberman, and R. A. Wood. 2007. Regional
differences in EpiPen prescriptions in the United States: The potential role of vitamin D.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(1):131-136.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

263

Campbell, R. L., J. B. Hagan, V. Manivannan, W. W. Decker, A. R. Kanthala, M. F. Bellolio,
V. D. Smith, and J. T. Li. 2012. Evaluation of National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network criteria for the diagnosis of anaphylaxis
in emergency department patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 129(3):748-752.
Campbell, R. L., M. F. Bellolio, B. D. Knutson, V. R. Bellamkonda, M. G. Fedko, D. M.
Nestler, and E. P. Hess. 2015a. Epinephrine in anaphylaxis: Higher risk of cardiovas­
cular complications and overdose after administration of intravenous bolus epinephrine
compared with intramuscular epinephrine. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(1):76-80.
Campbell, R. L., M. A. Park, M. A. Kueber, Jr., S. Lee, and J. B. Hagan. 2015b. Outcomes
of allergy/immunology follow-up after an emergency department evaluation for anaphy­
laxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(1):88-93.
Carlisle, S. K., P. A. Vargas, S. Noone, P. Steele, S. H. Sicherer, A. W. Burks, and S. M. Jones.
2010. Food allergy education for school nurses: A needs assessment survey by the Con­
sortium of Food Allergy Research. J Sch Nurs 26(5):360-367.
Carraro, S., A. C. Frigo, M. Perin, S. Stefani, C. Cardarelli, S. Bozzetto, E. Baraldi, and S.
Zanconato. 2012. Impact of oral immunotherapy on quality of life in children with cow
milk allergy: A pilot study. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 25(3):793-798.
Cavanaugh, R., and C. J. Strickland. 2011. Research to practice: Developing an integrated
anaphylaxis education curriculum for school nurses. J Sch Nurs 27(3):197-208.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2013. Voluntary guidelines for managing
food allergies in schools and early care and education programs. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Chang, A., R. Robison, M. Cai, and A. M. Singh. 2016. Natural history of food-triggered
atopic dermatitis and development of immediate reactions in children. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 4(2):229-236.
Chida, Y., M. Hamer, and A. Steptoe. 2008. A bidirectional relationship between psychosocial
factors and atopic disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychosom Med
70(1):102-116.
Cho, H. N., S. Hong, S. H. Lee, and H. Y. Yum. 2011. Nutritional status according to sen­
sitized food allergens in children with atopic dermatitis. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res
3(1):53-57.
Chokshi, N. Y., D. Patel, and C. M. Davis. 2015. Long-term increase in epinephrine avail­
ability associated with school nurse training in food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract 3(1):128-130.
Choo, K. J., F. E. Simons, and A. Sheikh. 2012. Glucocorticoids for the treatment of anaphy­
laxis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD007596.
Christie, L., R. J. Hine, J. G. Parker, and W. Burks. 2002. Food allergies in children affect
nutrient intake and growth. J Am Diet Assoc 102(11):1648-1651.
Cicutto, L., B. Julien, N. Y. Li, N. U. Nguyen-Luu, J. Butler, A. Clarke, S. J. Elliott, L. Harada,
S. McGhan, D. Stark, T. K. Vander Leek, and S. Waserman. 2012. Comparing school
environments with and without legislation for the prevention and management of ana­
phylaxis. Allergy 67(1):131-137.
Clark, S., S. A. Bock, T. J. Gaeta, B. E. Brenner, R. K. Cydulka, and C. A. Camargo. 2004.
Multicenter study of emergency department visits for food allergies. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 113(2):347-352.
Cohen, B. L., S. Noone, A. Munoz-Furlong, and S. H. Sicherer. 2004. Development of a ques­
tionnaire to measure quality of life in families with a child with food allergy. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 114(5):1159-1163.
Comstock, S. S., R. DeMera, L. C. Vega, E. J. Boren, S. Deane, L. A. Haapanen, and S. S.
Teuber. 2008. Allergic reactions to peanuts, tree nuts, and seeds aboard commercial
airliners. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 101(1):51-56.

264

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Council on School Health. 2009. Policy statement—guidance for the administration of medica­
tion in school. Pediatrics 124(4):1244-1251.
Crotty, M. P., and S. L. Taylor. 2010. Risks associated with foods having advisory milk label­
ing. J Allergy Clin Immunol 125(4):935-937.
Cuervo-Pardo, L., M. A. Barcena-Blanch, A. Gonzalez-Estrada, and B. Schroer. 2015. Apps for
food allergy: A critical assessment. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(6):980-981.
Dalal, I., M. Goldberg, and Y. Katz. 2012. Sesame seed food allergy. Curr Allergy Asthma
Rep 12(4):339-345.
David, T. J. 1984. Anaphylactic shock during elimination diets for severe atopic eczema. Arch
Dis Child 59(10):983-986.
De Schryver, S., M. Halbrich, A. Clarke, S. La Vieille, H. Eisman, R. Alizadehfar, L. Joseph, J.
Morris, and M. Ben-Shoshan. 2016. Tryptase levels in children presenting with anaphy­
laxis: Temporal trends and associated factors. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(4):1138-1142.
de Silva, D., M. Geromi, S. S. Panesar, A. Muraro, T. Werfel, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber,
G. Roberts, V. Cardona, A. E. Dubois, S. Halken, A. Host, L. K. Poulsen, R. Van Ree,
B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, I. Agache, and A. Sheikh. 2014. Acute and long-term management
of food allergy: Systematic review. Allergy 69(2):159-167.
Decastelli, L., S. Gallina, D. Manila Bianchi, S. Fragassi, and P. Restani. 2012. Undeclared
allergenic ingredients in foods from animal origin: Survey of an Italian region’s food
market, 2007-2009. Food Addit Contam Part B Surveill 5(3):160-164.
Desai, S. H., K. Jeong, J. D. Kattan, R. Lieberman, S. Wisniewski, and T. D. Green. 2015.
Anaphylaxis management before and after implementation of guidelines in the pediatric
emergency department. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(4):604-606.
Desjardins, M., A. Clarke, R. Alizadehfar, D. Grenier, H. Eisman, S. Carr, T. K. Vander Leek,
L. Teperman, N. Higgins, L. Joseph, G. Shand, and M. Ben-Shoshan. 2013. Canadian
allergists’ and nonallergists’ perception of epinephrine use and vaccination of persons
with egg allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(3):289-294.
Dhami, S., S. S. Panesar, G. Roberts, A. Muraro, M. Worm, M. B. Bilo, V. Cardona, A. E.
Dubois, A. DunnGalvin, P. Eigenmann, M. Fernandez-Rivas, S. Halken, G. Lack, B.
Niggemann, F. Rueff, A. F. Santos, B. Vlieg-Boerstra, Z. Q. Zolkipli, and A. Sheikh.
2014. Management of anaphylaxis: A systematic review. Allergy 69(2):168-175.
DunnGalvin, A., B. M. de BlokFlokstra, A. W. Burks, A. E. Dubois, and J. O. Hourihane.
2008. Food allergy QoL questionnaire for children aged 0-12 years: Content, construct,
and cross-cultural validity. Clin Exp Allergy 38(6):977-986.
DunnGalvin, A., A. Gaffney, and J. O. Hourihane. 2009. Developmental pathways in food
allergy: A new theoretical framework. Allergy 64(4):560-568.
Eldredge, C., and K. Schellhase. 2012. School-based management of food allergies in children.
Am Fam Physician 86(1):16-18.
Ellis, A. K., and J. H. Day. 2007. Incidence and characteristics of biphasic anaphylaxis: A
prospective evaluation of 103 patients. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 98(1):64-69.
Ellis, B. C., and S. G. Brown. 2013. Parenteral antihistamines cause hypotension in anaphy­
laxis. Emerg Med Australas 25(1):92-93.
Ercan, H., A. Ozen, H. Karatepe, M. Berber, and R. Cengizlier. 2012. Primary school teach­
ers’ knowledge about and attitudes toward anaphylaxis. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 23(5):
428-432.
Eriksson, N. E., C. Moller, S. Werner, J. Magnusson, and U. Bengtsson. 2003. The hazards of
kissing when you are food allergic. A survey on the occurrence of kiss-induced allergic
reactions among 1139 patients with self-reported food hypersensitivity. J Investig Al­
lergol Clin Immunol 13(3):149-154.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

265

Ewan, P. W., and A. T. Clark. 2001. Long-term prospective observational study of pa­
tients with peanut and nut allergy after participation in a management plan. Lancet
357(9250):111-115.
Factor, J. M., L. Mendelson, J. Lee, G. Nouman, and M. R. Lester. 2012. Effect of oral im­
munotherapy to peanut on food-specific quality of life. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
109(5):348-352.
Fiocchi, A., H. J. Schunemann, J. Brozek, P. Restani, K. Beyer, R. Troncone, A. Martelli, L.
Terracciano, S. L. Bahna, F. Rance, M. Ebisawa, R. G. Heine, A. Assa’ad, H. Sampson,
E. Verduci, G. R. Bouygue, C. Baena-Cagnani, W. Canonica, and R. F. Lockey. 2010.
Diagnosis and Rationale for Action Against Cow’s Milk Allergy (DRACMA): A summary
report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(6):1119-1128.
Flammarion, S., C. Santos, D. Guimber, L. Jouannic, C. Thumerelle, F. Gottrand, and A.
Deschildre. 2011. Diet and nutritional status of children with food allergies. Pediatr Al­
lergy Immunol 22(2):161-165.
Fleischer, D. M., T. T. Perry, D. Atkins, R. A. Wood, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, A. K. Henning,
D. Stablein, H. A. Sampson, and S. H. Sicherer. 2012. Allergic reactions to foods in
preschool-aged children in a prospective observational food allergy study. Pediatrics
130(1):e25-e32.
Flinterman, A. E., A. C. Knulst, Y. Meijer, C. A. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, and S. G. Pasmans. 2006.
Acute allergic reactions in children with AEDS after prolonged cow’s milk elimination
diets. Allergy 61(3):370-374.
Flokstra-de Blok, B. M., A. DunnGalvin, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, J. N. Oude Elberink, E. J.
Duiverman, J. O. Hourihane, and A. E. Dubois. 2008. Development and validation of the
self-administered Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire for adolescents. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 122(1):139-144.
Flokstra-de Blok, B. M., A. DunnGalvin, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, J. N. Oude Elberink, E. J.
Duiverman, J. O. Hourihane, and A. E. Dubois. 2009a. Development and validation of
a self-administered Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire for children. Clin Exp
Allergy 39(1):127-137.
Flokstra-de Blok, B. M., G. N. van der Meulen, A. DunnGalvin, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, J. N.
Oude Elberink, E. J. Duiverman, J. O. Hourihane, and A. E. Dubois. 2009b. Develop­
ment and validation of the Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire—Adult Form.
Allergy 64(8):1209-1217.
Ford, L. S., S. L. Taylor, R. Pacenza, L. M. Niemann, D. M. Lambrecht, and S. H. Sicherer.
2010. Food allergen advisory labeling and product contamination with egg, milk, and
peanut. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(2):384-385.
Ford, L. S., P. J. Turner, and D. E. Campbell. 2014. Recommendations for the management
of food allergies in a preschool/childcare setting and prevention of anaphylaxis. Expert
Rev Clin Immunol 10(7):867-874.
Franxman, T. J., L. Howe, E. Teich, and M. J. Greenhawt. 2015. Oral food challenge and
food allergy quality of life in caregivers of children with food allergy. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol Pract 3(1):50-56.
Furlong, T. J., J. DeSimone, and S. H. Sicherer. 2001. Peanut and tree nut allergic reactions
in restaurants and other food establishments. J Allergy Clin Immunol 108(5):867-870.
Gendel, S. M. 2012. Comparison of international food allergen labeling regulations. Regul
Toxicol Pharmacol 63(2):279-285.
Greenhawt, M. J., and B. P. Vickery. 2015. Allergist-reported trends in the practice of food
allergen oral immunotherapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(1):33-38.
Greenhawt, M. J., A. M. Singer, and A. P. Baptist. 2009. Food allergy and food allergy at­
titudes among college students. J Allergy Clin Immunol 124(2):323-327.

266

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Greenhawt, M., F. MacGillivray, G. Batty, M. Said, and C. Weiss. 2013. International study
of risk-mitigating factors and in-flight allergic reactions to peanut and tree nut. J Allergy
Clin Immunol Pract 1(2):186-194.
Greiwe, J. C., F. Pazheri, and B. Schroer. 2015. Nannies’ knowledge, attitude, and management
of food allergies of children: An online survey. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(1):63-67.
Groetch, M. E., L. Christie, P. A. Vargas, S. M. Jones, and S. H. Sicherer. 2010. Food allergy
educational needs of pediatric dietitians: A survey by the Consortium of Food Allergy
Research. J Nutr Educ Behav 42(4):259-264.
Groetch, M., M. Henry, M. B. Feuling, and J. Kim. 2013. Guidance for the nutrition manage­
ment of gastrointestinal allergy in pediatrics. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(4):323-331.
Guerlain, S., A. Hugine, and L. Wang. 2010. A comparison of 4 epinephrine autoinjec­
tor delivery systems: Usability and patient preference. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
104(2):172-177.
Gupta, R. S., J. S. Kim, E. E. Springston, B. Smith, J. A. Pongracic, X. Wang, and J. Holl.
2009. Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs in the United States. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 103(1):43-50.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, B. Smith, J. S. Kim, J. A. Pongracic, X. Wang, and J. Holl.
2010a. Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs of parents with food-allergic chil­
dren in the United States. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 21(6):927-934.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, J. S. Kim, B. Smith, J. A. Pongracic, X. Wang, and J. Holl.
2010b. Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs of primary care physicians. Pedi­
atrics 125(1):126-132.
Gupta, R. S., V. Rivkina, L. DeSantiago-Cardenas, B. Smith, B. Harvey-Gintoft, and S. A.
Whyte. 2014. Asthma and food allergy management in Chicago Public Schools. Pediat­
rics 134(4):729-736.
Hallett, R., L. A. Haapanen, and S. S. Teuber. 2002. Food allergies and kissing. N Engl J Med
346(23):1833-1834.
Harduar-Morano, L., M. R. Simon, S. Watkins, and C. Blackmore. 2010. Algorithm for the
diagnosis of anaphylaxis and its validation using population-based data on emergency
department visits for anaphylaxis in Florida. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(1):98-104.
Hefle, S. L., T. J. Furlong, L. Niemann, H. Lemon-Mule, S. Sicherer, and S. L. Taylor. 2007.
Consumer attitudes and risks associated with packaged foods having advisory labeling
regarding the presence of peanuts. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(1):171-176.
Herbert, L. J., and L. M. Dahlquist. 2008. Perceived history of anaphylaxis and parental
overprotection, autonomy, anxiety, and depression in food allergic young adults. J Clin
Psychol Med Settings 15(4):261-269.
Herbert, L., E. Shemesh, and B. Bender. 2016. Clinical management of psychosocial concerns
related to food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 4(2):205-213; quiz 214.
Hernandez-Trujillo, V., and F. E. Simons. 2013. Prospective evaluation of an anaphylaxis
education mini-handout: The AAAAI Anaphylaxis Wallet Card. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract 1(2):181-185.
Hobbs, C. B., A. C. Skinner, A. W. Burks, and B. P. Vickery. 2015. Food allergies affect growth
in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(1):133-134.
Hullmann, S. E., E. S. Molzon, A. R. Eddington, and L. L. Mullins. 2012. Dating anxiety
in adolescents and young adults with food allergies: A comparison to healthy peers. J
Asthma & Allergy Educ 3(4):172-177.
Isolauri, E., Y. Sutas, M. K. Salo, R. Isosomppi, and M. Kaila. 1998. Elimination diet in cow’s
milk allergy: Risk for impaired growth in young children. J Pediatr 132(6):1004-1009.
Jacobsen, R. C., S. Toy, A. J. Bonham, J. A. Salomone, 3rd, J. Ruthstrom, and M. Gratton.
2012. Anaphylaxis knowledge among paramedics: Results of a national survey. Prehosp
Emerg Care 16(4):527-534.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

267

Jarvinen, K. M., S. Makinen-Kiljunen, and H. Suomalainen. 1999. Cow’s milk challenge
through human milk evokes immune responses in infants with cow’s milk allergy. J
Pediatr 135(4):506-512.
Jarvinen, K. M., S. H. Sicherer, H. A. Sampson, and A. Nowak-Wegrzyn. 2008. Use of multiple
doses of epinephrine in food-induced anaphylaxis in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol
122(1):133-138.
Jarvinen, K. M., G. N. Konstantinou, M. Pilapil, M. C. Arrieta, S. Noone, H. A. Sampson, J.
Meddings, and A. Nowak-Wegrzyn. 2013. Intestinal permeability in children with food
allergy on specific elimination diets. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 24(6):589-595.
Jones, C. J., C. D. Llewellyn, A. J. Frew, G. Du Toit, S. Mukhopadhyay, and H. Smith. 2015.
Factors associated with good adherence to self-care behaviours amongst adolescents with
food allergy. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 26(2):111-118.
Keet, C. A., and R. A. Wood. 2014. Emerging therapies for food allergy. J Clin Invest
124(5):1880-1886.
Kelleher, M. M., A. DunnGalvin, A. Sheikh, C. Cullinane, J. Fitzsimons, and J. O. Hourihane.
2013. Twenty four-hour helpline access to expert management advice for food-allergy­
triggered anaphylaxis in infants, children and young people: A pragmatic, randomized
controlled trial. Allergy 68(12):1598-1604.
Kelso, J. M. 2014. Potential food allergens in medications. J Allergy Clin Immunol
133(6):1509-1518; quiz 1519-1520.
Kelso, J. M., M. J. Greenhawt, J. T. Li, R. A. Nicklas, D. I. Bernstein, J. Blessing-Moore,
L. Cox, D. Khan, D. M. Lang, J. Oppenheimer, J. M. Portnoy, C. R. Randolph, D. E.
Schuller, S. L. Spector, S. A. Tilles, and D. Wallace. 2012. Adverse reactions to vaccines
practice parameter 2012 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 130(1):25-43.
Kelso, J. M., M. J. Greenhawt, and J. T. Li. 2013. Update on influenza vaccination of egg
allergic patients. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 111(4):301-302.
Kim, J. S., and S. Sicherer. 2010. Should avoidance of foods be strict in prevention and treat­
ment of food allergy? Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 10(3):252-257.
Kim, J. S., A. Nowak-Wegrzyn, S. H. Sicherer, S. Noone, E. L. Moshier, and H. A. Sampson.
2011. Dietary baked milk accelerates the resolution of cow’s milk allergy in children. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 128(1):125-131.
King, R. M., R. C. Knibb, and J. O. Hourihane. 2009. Impact of peanut allergy on quality of
life, stress and anxiety in the family. Allergy 64(3):461-468.
Knibb, R. C., and H. Semper. 2013. Impact of suspected food allergy on emotional distress and
family life of parents prior to allergy diagnosis. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 24(8):798-803.
Knibb, R. C., N. F. Ibrahim, G. Stiefel, R. Petley, A. J. Cummings, R. M. King, D. Keeton, L.
Brown, M. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse, G. Roberts, and J. S. Lucas. 2012. The psychological
impact of diagnostic food challenges to confirm the resolution of peanut or tree nut al­
lergy. Clin Exp Allergy 42(3):451-459.
Kumar, S., K. Gupta, M. Das, and P. D. Dwivedi. 2013. Recent advancements in the thera­
peutics of food allergy. Recent Pat Food Nutr Agric 5(3):188-200.
Larenas-Linnemann, D., M. Blaiss, H. P. Van Bever, E. Compalati, and C. E. Baena-Cagnani.
2013. Pediatric sublingual immunotherapy efficacy: Evidence analysis, 2009-2012. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol 110(6):402-415.
Lau, G. Y., N. Patel, T. Umasunthar, C. Gore, J. O. Warner, H. Hanna, K. Phillips, A. M. Zaki,
M. Hodes, and R. J. Boyle. 2014. Anxiety and stress in mothers of food-allergic children.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 25(3):236-242.
Le, U. H., and A. W. Burks. 2014. Oral and sublingual immunotherapy for food allergy. World
Allergy Organ J 7(1):35.

268

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Lebovidge, J. S., H. Strauch, L. A. Kalish, and L. C. Schneider. 2009. Assessment of psycho­
logical distress among children and adolescents with food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
124(6):1282-1288.
Lee, J. M., and D. S. Greenes. 2000. Biphasic anaphylactic reactions in pediatrics. Pediatrics
106(4):762-766.
Lee, T. D., G. Gimenez, G. Grishina, M. Mishoe, H. A. Sampson, and S. Bunyavanich. 2015a.
Profile of a milk-allergic patient who tolerated partially hydrolyzed whey formula. J Al­
lergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(1):116-118.
Lee, S., M. F. Bellolio, E. P. Hess, P. Erwin, M. H. Murad, and R. L. Campbell. 2015b. Time
of onset and predictors of biphasic anaphylactic reactions: A systematic review and metaanalysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 3(3):408-416.
Leo, H. L., and N. M. Clark. 2012. Addressing food allergy issues within child care centers.
Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 12(4):304-310.
Leonard, S. A., H. A. Sampson, S. H. Sicherer, S. Noone, E. L. Moshier, J. Godbold, and A.
Nowak-Wegrzyn. 2012. Dietary baked egg accelerates resolution of egg allergy in chil­
dren. J Allergy Clin Immunol 130(2):473-480.
Leung, D. Y., H. A. Sampson, J. W. Yunginger, A. W. Burks, Jr., L. C. Schneider, C. H. Wortel,
F. M. Davis, J. D. Hyun, and W. R. Shanahan, Jr. 2003. Effect of anti-IgE therapy in
patients with peanut allergy. N Engl J Med 348(11):986-993.
Lever, R., C. MacDonald, P. Waugh, and T. Aitchison. 1998. Randomised controlled trial of
advice on an egg exclusion diet in young children with atopic eczema and sensitivity to
eggs. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 9(1):13-19.
Lieberman, J. A., C. Weiss, T. J. Furlong, M. Sicherer, and S. H. Sicherer. 2010. Bullying among
pediatric patients with food allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 105(4):282-286.
Lieberman, P. 2005. Biphasic anaphylactic reactions. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 95(3):217­
226; quiz 226, 258.
Lieberman, P., R. A. Nicklas, C. Randolph, J. Oppenheimer, D. Bernstein, J. Bernstein, A. Ellis,
D. B. Golden, P. Greenberger, S. Kemp, D. Khan, D. Ledford, J. Lieberman, D. Metcalfe,
A. Nowak-Wegrzyn, S. Sicherer, D. Wallace, J. Blessing-Moore, D. Lang, J. M. Portnoy,
D. Schuller, S. Spector, and S. A. Tilles. 2015. Anaphylaxis—a practice parameter update
2015. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 115(5):341-384.
Lifschitz, C. H., H. K. Hawkins, C. Guerra, and N. Byrd. 1988. Anaphylactic shock due to
cow’s milk protein hypersensitivity in a breast-fed infant. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
7(1):141-144.
Lin, R. Y., L. B. Schwartz, A. Curry, G. R. Pesola, R. J. Knight, H. S. Lee, L. Bakalchuk, C.
Tenenbaum, and R. E. Westfal. 2000a. Histamine and tryptase levels in patients with
acute allergic reactions: An emergency department-based study. J Allergy Clin Immunol
106(1 Pt 1):65-71.
Lin, R. Y., A. Curry, G. R. Pesola, R. J. Knight, H. S. Lee, L. Bakalchuk, C. Tenenbaum, and
R. E. Westfal. 2000b. Improved outcomes in patients with acute allergic syndromes who
are treated with combined H1 and H2 antagonists. Ann Emerg Med 36(5):462-468.
Macadam, C., J. Barnett, G. Roberts, G. Stiefel, R. King, M. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse, J. A.
Holloway, and J. S. Lucas. 2012. What factors affect the carriage of epinephrine autoinjectors by teenagers? Clin Transl Allergy 2(1):3.
MacKenzie, H., G. Roberts, D. van Laar, and T. Dean. 2010. Teenagers’ experiences of liv­
ing with food hypersensitivity: A qualitative study. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 21(4 Pt
1):595-602.
MacKenzie, H., G. Roberts, D. Van Laar, and T. Dean. 2012. A new quality of life scale for
teenagers with food hypersensitivity. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 23(5):404-411.
Maloney, J. M., M. D. Chapman, and S. H. Sicherer. 2006. Peanut allergen exposure through
saliva: Assessment and interventions to reduce exposure. J Allergy Clin Immunol
118(3):719-724.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

269

Marchisotto, M. J., L. Harada, J. A. Blumenstock, L. A. Bilaver, S. Waserman, S. Sicherer, Y.
Boloh, L. Regent, M. Said, S. Schnadt, K. J. Allen, A. Muraro, S. L. Taylor, and R. S.
Gupta. 2016. Global perceptions of food allergy thresholds in 16 countries. Allergy
71(8):1081-1085.
Marrs, T., and G. Lack. 2013. Why do few food-allergic adolescents treat anaphylaxis with
adrenaline?-—Reviewing a pressing issue. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 24(3):222-229.
Martorell Calatayud, C., A. Muriel Garcia, A. Martorell Aragones, and B. De La Hoz
Caballer. 2014. Safety and efficacy profile and immunological changes associated with
oral immunotherapy for IgE-mediated cow’s milk allergy in children: Systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 24(5):298-307.
Maslin, K., R. Meyer, L. Reeves, H. Mackenzie, A. Swain, W. Stuart-Smith, R. Loblay, M.
Groetch, and C. Venter. 2014. Food allergy competencies of dietitians in the United
Kingdom, Australia and United States of America. Clin Transl Allergy 4:37.
Maslin, K., J. Grundy, G. Glasbey, T. Dean, S. H. Arshad, K. Grimshaw, E. Oliver, G. Roberts,
and C. Venter. 2016. Cows’ milk exclusion diet during infancy: Is there a long-term
effect on children’s eating behaviour and food preferences? Pediatr Allergy Immunol
27(2):141-146.
Mehr, S., W. K. Liew, D. Tey, and M. L. Tang. 2009. Clinical predictors for biphasic reactions
in children presenting with anaphylaxis. Clin Exp Allergy 39(9):1390-1396.
Mehta, H., M. Ramesh, E. Feuille, M. Groetch, and J. Wang. 2014. Growth comparison
in children with and without food allergies in 2 different demographic populations. J
Pediatr 165(4):842-848.
Meyer, R., C. Venter, A. T. Fox, and N. Shah. 2012. Practical dietary management of protein
energy malnutrition in young children with cow’s milk protein allergy. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 23(4):307-314.
Meyer, R., C. De Koker, R. Dziubak, C. Venter, G. Dominguez-Ortega, R. Cutts, N. Yerlett,
A. K. Skrapak, A. T. Fox, and N. Shah. 2014. Malnutrition in children with food allergies
in the UK. J Hum Nutr Diet 27(3):227-235.
Monks, H., M. H. Gowland, H. MacKenzie, M. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse, R. King, J. S. Lucas,
and G. Roberts. 2010. How do teenagers manage their food allergies? Clin Exp Allergy
40(10):1533-1540.
Monti, G., L. Marinaro, V. Libanore, A. Peltran, M. C. Muratore, and L. Silvestro. 2006.
Anaphylaxis due to fish hypersensitivity in an exclusively breastfed infant. Acta Paediatr
95(11):1514-1515.
Morawetz, D. Y., H. Hiscock, K. J. Allen, S. Davies, and M. H. Danchin. 2014. Manage­
ment of food allergy: A survey of Australian paediatricians. J Paediatr Child Health
50(6):432-437.
Mori, F., D. Serranti, S. Barni, N. Pucci, M. E. Rossi, M. de Martino, and E. Novembre.
2015. A kwashiorkor case due to the use of an exclusive rice milk diet to treat atopic
dermatitis. Nutr J 14:83.
Mukaida, K., T. Kusunoki, T. Morimoto, T. Yasumi, R. Nishikomori, T. Heike, T. Fujii, and
T. Nakahata. 2010. The effect of past food avoidance due to allergic symptoms on the
growth of children at school age. Allergol Int 59(4):369-374.
Mullins, R. J. 2003. Anaphylaxis: risk factors for recurrence. Clin Exp Allergy 33(8):1033-1040.
Muraro, A., G. Roberts, M. Worm, M. B. Bilo, K. Brockow, M. Fernandez Rivas, A. F.
Santos, Z. Q. Zolkipli, A. Bellou, K. Beyer, C. Bindslev-Jensen, V. Cardona, A. T. Clark,
P. Demoly, A. E. Dubois, A. DunnGalvin, P. Eigenmann, S. Halken, L. Harada, G. Lack,
M. Jutel, B. Niggemann, F. Rueff, F. Timmermans, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, T. Werfel, S.
Dhami, S. Panesar, C. A. Akdis, and A. Sheikh. 2014a. Anaphylaxis: Guidelines from
the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. Allergy 69(8):1026-1045.

270

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Muraro, A., T. Werfel, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, G. Roberts, K. Beyer, C. Bindslev-Jensen,
V. Cardona, A. Dubois, G. duToit, P. Eigenmann, M. Fernandez Rivas, S. Halken, L.
Hickstein, A. Host, E. Knol, G. Lack, M. J. Marchisotto, B. Niggemann, B. I. Nwaru,
N. G. Papadopoulos, L. K. Poulsen, A. F. Santos, I. Skypala, A. Schoepfer, R. Van Ree, C.
Venter, M. Worm, B. Vlieg-Boerstra, S. Panesar, D. de Silva, K. Soares-Weiser, A. Sheikh,
B. K. Ballmer-Weber, C. Nilsson, N. W. de Jong, and C. A. Akdis. 2014b. EAACI Food
Allergy and Anaphylaxis Guidelines: Diagnosis and management of food allergy. Allergy
69(8):1008-1025.
Muraro, A., A. E. Dubois, A. DunnGalvin, J. O. Hourihane, N. W. de Jong, R. Meyer, S. S.
Panesar, G. Roberts, S. Salvilla, A. Sheikh, A. Worth, and B. M. Flokstra-de Blok. 2014c.
EAACI Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Guidelines. Food allergy health-related quality of
life measures. Allergy 69(7):845-853.
Muraro, A., I. Agache, A. Clark, A. Sheikh, G. Roberts, C. A. Akdis, L. M. Borrego, J. Higgs,
J. O. Hourihane, P. Jorgensen, A. Mazon, D. Parmigiani, M. Said, S. Schnadt, H. van
Os-Medendorp, B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, and M. Wickman. 2014d. EAACI Food Allergy and
Anaphylaxis Guidelines: Managing patients with food allergy in the community. Allergy
69(8):1046-1057.
Nachshon, L., M. R. Goldberg, N. Schwartz, T. Sinai, R. Amitzur-Levy, A. Elizur, E. Eisenberg,
and Y. Katz. 2014. Decreased bone mineral density in young adult IgE-mediated cow’s
milk-allergic patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 134(5):1108-1113.
Nermes, M., S. Salminen, and E. Isolauri. 2013. Is there a role for probiotics in the prevention
or treatment of food allergy? Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 13(6):622-630.
Noimark, L., J. Wales, G. Du Toit, C. Pastacaldi, D. Haddad, J. Gardner, W. Hyer, G. Vance,
C. Townshend, M. Alfaham, P. D. Arkwright, R. Rao, S. Kapoor, A. Summerfield, J. O.
Warner, and G. Roberts. 2012. The use of adrenaline autoinjectors by children and teen­
agers. Clin Exp Allergy 42(2):284-292.
Nowak-Wegrzyn, A., and H. A. Sampson. 2011. Future therapies for food allergies. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 127(3):558-573; quiz 574-555.
Nowak-Wegrzyn, A., K. A. Bloom, S. H. Sicherer, W. G. Shreffler, S. Noone, N. Wanich, and
H. A. Sampson. 2008. Tolerance to extensively heated milk in children with cow’s milk
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 122(2):342-347.
Nurmatov, U., G. Devereux, A. Worth, L. Healy, and A. Sheikh. 2014a. Effectiveness and
safety of orally administered immunotherapy for food allergies: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Br J Nutr 111(1):12-22.
Nurmatov, U. B., E. Rhatigan, F. E. Simons, and A. Sheikh. 2014b. H2-antihistamines for
the treatment of anaphylaxis with and without shock: A systematic review. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 112(2):126-131.
Oren, E., A. Banerji, S. Clark, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2007. Food-induced anaphylaxis and
repeated epinephrine treatments. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 99(5):429-432.
Otani, I. M., P. Begin, C. Kearney, T. L. Dominguez, A. Mehrotra, L. R. Bacal, S. Wilson,
and K. Nadeau. 2014. Multiple-allergen oral immunotherapy improves quality of life in
caregivers of food-allergic pediatric subjects. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 10(1):25.
Oyoshi, M. K., H. C. Oettgen, T. A. Chatila, R. S. Geha, and P. J. Bryce. 2014. Food allergy:
Insights into etiology, prevention, and treatment provided by murine models. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 133(2):309-317.
Pajno, G. B., L. Cox, L. Caminiti, V. Ramistella, and G. Crisafulli. 2014. Oral immunotherapy
for treatment of immunoglobulin e-mediated food allergy: The transition to clinical
practice. Pediatr Allergy Immunol Pulmonol 27(2):42-50.
Perry, T. T., M. K. Conover-Walker, A. Pomes, M. D. Chapman, and R. A. Wood. 2004. Dis­
tribution of peanut allergen in the environment. J Allergy Clin Immunol 113(5):973-976.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

271

Polloni, L., F. Lazzarotto, A. Toniolo, G. Ducolin, and A. Muraro. 2013. What do school
personnel know, think and feel about food allergies? Clin Transl Allergy 3(1):39.
Powers, J., M. D. Bergren, and L. Finnegan. 2007. Comparison of school food allergy emer­
gency plans to the Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network’s standard plan. J Sch Nurs
23(5):252-258.
Pumphrey, R. S. 2000. Lessons for management of anaphylaxis from a study of fatal reactions.
Clin Exp Allergy 30(8):1144-1150.
Pumphrey, R. S. 2003. Fatal posture in anaphylactic shock. J Allergy Clin Immunol
112(2):451-452.
Pumphrey, R. S., and M. H. Gowland. 2007. Further fatal allergic reactions to food in the
United Kingdom, 1999-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 119(4):1018-1019.
Quercia, O., G. Zoccatelli, G. F. Stefanini, G. Mistrello, S. Amato, M. Bolla, F. Emiliani, and
R. Asero. 2012. Allergy to beer in LTP-sensitized patients: Beers are not all the same.
Allergy 67(9):1186-1189.
Reeves, L., R. Meyer, J. Holloway, and C. Venter. 2015. The development and implementation
of a training package for dietitians on cow’s milk protein allergy in infants and children
based on UK RCPCH competencies for food allergies—A pilot study. Clin Transl Allergy
5(1):4.
Resnick, E. S., M. M. Pieretti, J. Maloney, S. Noone, A. Munoz-Furlong, and S. H. Sicherer.
2010. Development of a questionnaire to measure quality of life in adolescents with food
allergy: The FAQL-teen. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 105(5):364-368.
Roberts, G., N. Golder, and G. Lack. 2002. Bronchial challenges with aerosolized food in
asthmatic, food-allergic children. Allergy 57(8):713-717.
Robertson, O. N., J. O. Hourihane, B. C. Remington, J. L. Baumert, and S. L. Taylor.
2013. Survey of peanut levels in selected Irish food products bearing peanut allergen
advisory labels. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk Assess
30(9):1467-1472.
Robinson, J. M., and M. Ficca. 2012. Managing the student with severe food allergies. J Sch
Nurs 28(3):187-194.
Rolland, J. M., E. Apostolou, M. P. de Leon, C. S. Stockley, and R. E. O’Hehir. 2008. Specific
and sensitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for analysis of residual allergenic
food proteins in commercial bottled wine fined with egg white, milk, and nongrape­
derived tannins. J Agric Food Chem 56(2):349-354.
Rosen, J., S. Albin, and S. H. Sicherer. 2014. Creation and validation of web-based food allergy
audiovisual educational materials for caregivers. Allergy Asthma Proc 35(2):178-184.
Roy, K. M., and M. C. Roberts. 2011. Peanut allergy in children: Relationships to healthrelated quality of life, anxiety, and parental stress. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 50(11):1045-1051.
Runge, J. W., J. C. Martinez, E. M. Caravati, S. G. Williamson, and S. C. Hartsell. 1992.
Histamine antagonists in the treatment of acute allergic reactions. Ann Emerg Med
21(3):237-242.
Sahiner, U. M., S. T. Yavuz, B. Buyuktiryaki, O. Cavkaytar, E. A. Yilmaz, A. Tuncer, and C.
Sackesen. 2014. Serum basal tryptase may be a good marker for predicting the risk of
anaphylaxis in children with food allergy. Allergy 69(2):265-268.
Sala-Cunill, A., V. Cardona, M. Labrador-Horrillo, O. Luengo, O. Esteso, T. Garriga,
M. Vicario, and M. Guilarte. 2013. Usefulness and limitations of sequential serum
tryptase for the diagnosis of anaphylaxis in 102 patients. Int Arch Allergy Immunol
160(2):192-199.
Salvilla, S. A., A. E. Dubois, B. M. Flokstra-de Blok, S. S. Panesar, A. Worth, S. Patel, A.
Muraro, S. Halken, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, A. DunnGalvin, J. O. Hourihane, L.
Regent, N. W. de Jong, G. Roberts, and A. Sheikh. 2014. Disease-specific health-related
quality of life instruments for IgE-mediated food allergy. Allergy 69(7):834-844.

272

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Sampson, H. A., L. Mendelson, and J. P. Rosen. 1992. Fatal and near-fatal anaphylactic reac­
tions to food in children and adolescents. N Engl J Med 327(6):380-384.
Sampson, M. A., A. Munoz-Furlong, and S. H. Sicherer. 2006a. Risk-taking and coping
strategies of adolescents and young adults with food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
117(6):1440-1445.
Sampson, H. A., A. Munoz-Furlong, R. L. Campbell, N. F. Adkinson, Jr., S. A. Bock, A.
Branum, S. G. Brown, C. A. Camargo, Jr., R. Cydulka, S. J. Galli, J. Gidudu, R. S.
Gruchalla, A. D. Harlor, Jr., D. L. Hepner, L. M. Lewis, P. L. Lieberman, D. D. Metcalfe,
R. O’Connor, A. Muraro, A. Rudman, C. Schmitt, D. Scherrer, F. E. Simons, S. Thomas,
J. P. Wood, and W. W. Decker. 2006b. Second symposium on the definition and man­
agement of anaphylaxis: Summary report—Second National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network symposium. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 117(2):391-397.
Sampson, H. A., S. Aceves, S. A. Bock, J. James, S. Jones, D. Lang, K. Nadeau, A. NowakWegrzyn, J. Oppenheimer, T. T. Perry, C. Randolph, S. H. Sicherer, R. A. Simon, B. P.
Vickery, and R. Wood. 2014. Food allergy: A practice parameter update—2014. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 134(5):1016-1025.
Sasaki, K., S. Sugiura, T. Matsui, T. Nakagawa, J. Nakata, N. Kando, and K. Ito. 2015. A
workshop with practical training for anaphylaxis management improves the self-efficacy
of school personnel. Allergol Int 64(2):156-160.
Sato, S., N. Yanagida, K. Ogura, T. Asaumi, Y. Okada, Y. Koike, K. Iikura, A. Syukuya, and
M. Ebisawa. 2014. Immunotherapy in food allergy: Towards new strategies. Asian Pac
J Allergy Immunol 32(3):195-202.
Schneider, L. C., R. Rachid, J. LeBovidge, E. Blood, M. Mittal, and D. T. Umetsu. 2013. A
pilot study of omalizumab to facilitate rapid oral desensitization in high-risk peanutallergic patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 132(6):1368-1374.
Senti, G., and T. M. Kundig. 2016. Novel delivery routes for allergy immunotherapy: Intralymphatic, epicutaneous, and intradermal. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 36(1):25-37.
Shah, S. S., C. L. Parker, and C. M. Davis. 2013. Improvement of teacher food allergy knowl­
edge in socioeconomically diverse schools after educational intervention. Clin Pediatr
(Phila) 52(9):812-820.
Shanahan, L., N. Zucker, W. E. Copeland, E. J. Costello, and A. Angold. 2014. Are children
and adolescents with food allergies at increased risk for psychopathology? J Psychosom
Res 77(6):468-473.
Sharma, A., T. Prematta, and T. Fausnight. 2012. A pediatric food allergy support group
can improve parent and physician communication: Results of a parent survey. J Allergy
(Cairo) 2012:168053.
Sheetz, A. H., P. G. Goldman, K. Millett, J. C. Franks, C. L. McIntyre, C. R. Carroll, D.
Gorak, C. S. Harrison, and M. A. Carrick. 2004. Guidelines for managing life-threaten­
ing food allergies in Massachusetts schools. J Sch Health 74(5):155-160.
Sheikh, A., V. ten Broek, S. G. Brown, and F. E. Simons. 2007. H1-antihistamines for the treat­
ment of anaphylaxis with and without shock. Cochrane Database Syst Rev(1):CD006160.
Sheikh, A., F. E. Simons, V. Barbour, and A. Worth. 2012a. Adrenaline auto-injectors for the
treatment of anaphylaxis with and without cardiovascular collapse in the community.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD008935.
Sheikh, A., U. Nurmatov, I. Venderbosch, and E. Bischoff. 2012b. Oral immunotherapy for
the treatment of peanut allergy: Systematic review of six case series studies. Prim Care
Respir J 21(1):41-49.
Shemesh, E., R. A. Annunziato, M. A. Ambrose, N. L. Ravid, C. Mullarkey, M. Rubes, K.
Chuang, M. Sicherer, and S. H. Sicherer. 2013. Child and parental reports of bullying in
a consecutive sample of children with food allergy. Pediatrics 131(1):e10-e17.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

273

Shemesh, E., B. J. Lewis, M. Rubes, M. A. Ambrose, M. K. Cahill, C. Knight, S. H. Sicherer,
and R. A. Annunziato. 2015. Mental health screening outcomes in a pediatric specialty
care setting. J Pediatr 168:193.
Sicherer, S. H. 2001. Clinical implications of cross-reactive food allergens. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 108(6):881-890.
Sicherer, S. H., T. J. Furlong, J. DeSimone, and H. A. Sampson. 1999. Self-reported allergic
reactions to peanut on commercial airliners. J Allergy Clin Immunol 104(1):186-189.
Sicherer, S. H., J. A. Forman, and S. A. Noone. 2000. Use assessment of self-administered
epinephrine among food-allergic children and pediatricians. Pediatrics 105(2):359-362.
Sicherer, S. H., F. E. Simons, and the Section on Allergy and Immunology. 2007. Self-injectable
epinephrine for first-aid management of anaphylaxis. Pediatrics 119(3):638-646.
Sicherer, S. H., T. Mahr, and the Section on Allergy and Immunology. 2010. Management of
food allergy in the school setting. Pediatrics 126(6):1232-1239.
Sicherer, S. H., P. A. Vargas, M. E. Groetch, L. Christie, S. K. Carlisle, S. Noone, and S. M.
Jones. 2012. Development and validation of educational materials for food allergy. J
Pediatr 160(4):651-656.
Sicherer, S. H., R. A. Wood, B. P. Vickery, T. T. Perry, S. M. Jones, D. Y. Leung, B. Blackwell,
P. Dawson, A. W. Burks, R. Lindblad, and H. A. Sampson. 2016. Impact of allergic reac­
tions on food-specific IgE concentrations and skin test results. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract 4(2):239-245.
Simons, F. E., L. R. Ardusso, M. B. Bilo, V. Cardona, M. Ebisawa, Y. M. El-Gamal, P.
Lieberman, R. F. Lockey, A. Muraro, G. Roberts, M. Sanchez-Borges, A. Sheikh, L. P.
Shek, D. V. Wallace, and M. Worm. 2014. International consensus on (ICON) anaphy­
laxis. World Allergy Organ J 7(1):9.
Simons, F. E., M. Ebisawa, M. Sanchez-Borges, B. Y. Thong, M. Worm, L. K. Tanno, R. F.
Lockey, Y. M. El-Gamal, S. G. Brown, H. S. Park, and A. Sheikh. 2015. 2015 Update
of the evidence base: World Allergy Organization anaphylaxis guidelines. World Allergy
Organ J 8(1):32.
Simonte, S. J., S. Ma, S. Mofidi, and S. H. Sicherer. 2003. Relevance of casual contact with
peanut butter in children with peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 112(1):180-182.
Soller, L., J. Hourihane, and A. DunnGalvin. 2014. The impact of oral food challenge tests on
food allergy health-related quality of life. Allergy 69(9):1255-1257.
Sova, C., M. B. Feuling, M. Baumler, L. Gleason, J. S. Tam, H. Zafra, and P. S. Goday. 2013.
Systematic review of nutrient intake and growth in children with multiple IgE-mediated
food allergies. Nutr Clin Pract 28(6):669-675.
Springston, E. E., B. Smith, J. Shulruff, J. Pongracic, J. Holl, and R. S. Gupta. 2010. Varia­
tions in quality of life among caregivers of food allergic children. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol 105(4):287-294.
Sun, J., X. Hui, W. Ying, D. Liu, and X. Wang. 2014. Efficacy of allergen-specific immu­
notherapy for peanut allergy: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Allergy
Asthma Proc 35(2):171-177.
Tey, D., S. C. Dharmage, M. N. Robinson, K. J. Allen, L. C. Gurrin, and M. L. Tang. 2012.
Frequent baked egg ingestion was not associated with change in rate of decline in
egg skin prick test in children with challenge confirmed egg allergy. Clin Exp Allergy
42(12):1782-1790.
Tiainen, J. M., O. M. Nuutinen, and M. P. Kalavainen. 1995. Diet and nutritional status in
children with cow’s milk allergy. Eur J Clin Nutr 49(8):605-612.
Tripathi, A., S. P. Commins, P. W. Heymann, and T. A. Platts-Mills. 2015. Diagnostic and
experimental food challenges in patients with nonimmediate reactions to food. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 135(4):985-987.

274

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Turner, P. J., J. Southern, N. J. Andrews, E. Miller, and M. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse. 2015. Safety
of live attenuated influenza vaccine in atopic children with egg allergy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 136(2):376-381.
Vale, S., J. Smith, M. Said, R. J. Mullins, and R. Loh. 2015. ASCIA guidelines for preven­
tion of anaphylaxis in schools, pre-schools and childcare: 2015 update. J Paediatr Child
Health 51(10):949-954.
van der Velde, J. L., B. M. Flokstra-de Blok, H. de Groot, J. N. Oude-Elberink, M. Kerkhof,
E. J. Duiverman, and A. E. Dubois. 2012. Food allergy-related quality of life after doubleblind, placebo-controlled food challenges in adults, adolescents, and children. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 130(5):1136-1143.
van Os-Medendorp, H., I. van Leent-de Wit, M. de Bruin-Weller, and A. Knulst. 2015. Usage
and users of online self-management programs for adult patients with atopic dermatitis
and food allergy: An explorative study. JMIR Res Protoc 4(2):e57.
Versluis, A., A. C. Knulst, A. G. Kruizinga, A. Michelsen, G. F. Houben, J. L. Baumert, and H.
van Os-Medendorp. 2015. Frequency, severity and causes of unexpected allergic reactions
to food: A systematic literature review. Clin Exp Allergy 45(2):347-367.
Vieira, M. C., M. B. Morais, J. V. Spolidoro, M. S. Toporovski, A. L. Cardoso, G. T. Araujo,
V. Nudelman, and M. C. Fonseca. 2010. A survey on clinical presentation and nutritional
status of infants with suspected cow’ milk allergy. BMC Pediatr 10:25.
Wahl, A., H. Stephens, M. Ruffo, and A. L. Jones. 2015. The evaluation of a food allergy and
epinephrine autoinjector training program for personnel who care for children in schools
and community settings. J Sch Nurs 31(2):91-98.
Wainstein, B. K., S. Kashef, M. Ziegler, D. Jelley, and J. B. Ziegler. 2007. Frequency and
significance of immediate contact reactions to peanut in peanut-sensitive children. Clin
Exp Allergy 37(6):839-845.
Wang, J., M. C. Young, and A. Nowak-Wegrzyn. 2014. International survey of knowledge of
food-induced anaphylaxis. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 25(7):644-650.
Ward, C. E., and M. J. Greenhawt. 2015. Treatment of allergic reactions and quality of life
among caregivers of food-allergic children. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 114(4):312-318.
Warren, C. M., R. S. Gupta, M. W. Sohn, E. H. Oh, N. Lal, C. F. Garfield, D. Caruso, X.
Wang, and J. A. Pongracic. 2015. Differences in empowerment and quality of life among
parents of children with food allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 114(2):117-125.
Wassenberg, J., M. M. Cochard, A. Dunngalvin, P. Ballabeni, B. M. Flokstra-de Blok, C. J.
Newman, M. Hofer, and P. A. Eigenmann. 2012. Parent perceived quality of life is agedependent in children with food allergy. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 23(5):412-419.
Weiss, C., A. Munoz-Furlong, T. J. Furlong, and J. Arbit. 2004. Impact of food allergies on
school nursing practice. J Sch Nurs 20(5):268-278.
White, L., J. Aubin, C. Bradford, C. Alix, L. Hughes, and W. Phipatanakul. 2015. Effective­
ness of a computer module to augment the training of school staff in the management of
students with food allergies. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 114(3):254-255.
Wongkaewpothong, P., P. Pacharn, C. Sripramong, S. Boonchoo, S. Piboonpocanun, N.
Visitsunthorn, P. Vichyanond, and O. Jirapongsananuruk. 2014. The utility of serum
tryptase in the diagnosis of food-induced anaphylaxis. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res
6(4):304-309.
Wood, R. A., J. S. Kim, R. Lindblad, K. Nadeau, A. K. Henning, P. Dawson, M. Plaut, and
H. A. Sampson. 2015. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of omali­
zumab combined with oral immunotherapy for the treatment of cow’s milk allergy. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 137(4):1103-1110.
Worth, A., U. Nurmatov, and A. Sheikh. 2010. Key components of anaphylaxis management
plans: Consensus findings from a national electronic Delphi study. JRSM Short Rep
1(5):42.

MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SETTING

275

Yeung, J. P., L. A. Kloda, J. McDevitt, M. Ben-Shoshan, and R. Alizadehfar. 2012. Oral im­
munotherapy for milk allergy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD009542.
Young, M. C., A. Munoz-Furlong, and S. H. Sicherer. 2009. Management of food allergies
in schools: A perspective for allergists. J Allergy Clin Immunol 124(2):175-182; quiz
183-184.
Yu, J. E., A. Kumar, C. Bruhn, S. S. Teuber, and S. H. Sicherer. 2008. Development of a food
allergy education resource for primary care physicians. BMC Med Educ 8:45.
Zijlstra, W. T., A. E. Flinterman, L. Soeters, A. C. Knulst, G. Sinnema, M. P. L’Hoir, and
S. G. Pasmans. 2010. Parental anxiety before and after food challenges in children with
suspected peanut and hazelnut allergy. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 21(2 Pt 2):e439-e445.
Zurzolo, G., J. Koplin, M. Mathai, S. Taylor, D. Tey, and K. Allen. 2013. Foods with precau­
tionary allergen labeling in Australia rarely contain detectable allergen. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 1(4):401-403.

7
Management of Packaged Foods

Consumers with a food allergy, like the general population, rely on
packaged foods as a key component of their diet. Therefore, the packaged
foods industry is an essential stakeholder if consumers with food allergies
are to succeed in their prevention approaches and be safe. For this reason,
the labeling of allergenic foods is an important public health intervention
that assists consumers in avoiding potentially allergenic foods.
The food supply chain from production to consumption is complex (see
Figure 7-1). Packaged foods are made and assembled primarily in commer­
cial food processing facilities but also in restaurants, retail grocery stores,
and other retail outlets. Commercial food processing facilities range from
very large companies that may make dozens of different products within a
single facility to very small companies that tend to make a narrower range
of products but also often use shared facilities. In addition, food processing
equipment is frequently shared to make different products. Furthermore, a
packaged food may contain several dozen ingredients that may be obtained
from a range of suppliers who likewise may have upstream suppliers.
Finally, the farms and other suppliers that are sources of these ingredients
(e.g., oceans, mines) are also often diversified and often share harvesting
equipment, transportation vehicles, and storage facilities.
Allergens, then, can enter foods from many sources along the food
chain, intentionally or unintentionally, through cross-contact1 in farms,
1 Cross-contact is the inadvertent introduction of allergenic food residues into a product. It
is generally the result of environmental exposure during processing or handling, which may
occur when multiple foods are produced in the same facility, when the same processing line

277

278

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Food and
Beverage
Services

Farm
Input Supply

Farm
Production

First-Line
Handlers

Institutional
Buyers
Wholesale and
Logistics

Manufacturers

Consumer
Retail Food
Stores

Food Banks

Food and Food Services
Money and Demand Information
Alternative Direct Channels

FIGURE 7-1 Conceptual model of a food supply chain. Elements or actors in this
supply chain in one area (e.g., region or country) also have interactions (e.g., inter­
national trade) with actors in other areas.
SOURCE: IOM and NRC, 2015.

Figure 2-1 and S-1
Bitmapped
storage, distribution and manufacturing facilities, food service establish­
ments, or the home. The food industry, of course, wishes to prevent the
possibility that a consumer with a food allergy will experience an adverse
reaction after consuming a packaged food product. In reality, achieving this
goal at all times is challenging. From the food industry perspective, three
general approaches can be used to minimize the risk of a reaction from an
allergenic food: (1) eliminate potential allergens or specific allergens from
products; (2) list the allergen on the product label as an ingredient, when
it is intentionally added as such; and (3) implement strict allergen control
plans (ACPs) to minimize allergen contamination and use advisory labels
(precautionary allergen labeling, or PAL) to inform the consumer about the
risk when necessary. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Food Safety
is used to produce allergenic and nonallergenic food as the result of ineffective cleaning, the
generation of dust or aerosols containing an allergen, or other causes (http://www.fda.gov/
Food/GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/Allergens/ucm106890.
htm#q19 [accessed January 5, 2017]).

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

279

Modernization Act2 (FSMA) identifies allergens as a hazard that is reason­
ably likely to occur in food manufacturing operations and requires that
food manufacturing develop ACPs, In so doing, the FSMA acknowledges
the importance of food allergy as a public health priority for the packaged
food industry. This chapter includes a brief description of ACPs in Box 7-1
but does not attempt to review them in depth even though the development
of effective ACPs has an impact on both labeling and PAL.
Likewise, although the committee recognizes that processing can affect
the allergenicity of foods either by reducing the amount of the allergenic
protein or by altering the protein in some manner, the chapter does not
examine the effects of processing in depth. The main focus of this chapter is
on labeling and PAL because of the obvious importance of these approaches
to the consumer.
Although this chapter focuses on the food manufacturing industry, it is
important to note that in addition to packaged foods, foods are consumed
in many other forms and venues (e.g., homes, restaurants, other retail food
establishments, places of worship, camps, recreational facilities). A few
of these situations are addressed in Chapter 8. Following a review of the
current labeling practices in packaged foods, the chapter describes a label­
ing approach based on risk and makes recommendations to that effect.
Research needs are also included. The Annex to this chapter delves into
data inputs needed for a risk-based approach and their limitations.
ELIMINATING ALLERGENS FROM PACKAGED FOODS
As noted above, one approach to managing food allergen hazards
within food manufacturing operations is to eliminate one or more aller­
gens from the group of products being manufactured in shared facilities.
Within the product development groups in some major food companies, a
so-called allergen-gating process has been implemented as a best practice.
This process is intended to question and, if desirable or possible, eliminate
specific allergenic foods (or ingredients derived from those foods) from a
new food product under development. Allergen-gating can take several
forms. For example, a food company might question the development of a
new product containing a peanut butter component because the manufac­
turing of that new product might introduce peanut into a manufacturing
facility that presently does not include peanuts. In another example, a milk
ingredient might be considered as a relatively minor part of a new product
formulation. The decision to include the milk ingredient could be ques­
tioned and the product might be formulated without the milk ingredient
if that change has no impact on product quality. Finally, in a third varia­
2 Public Law 353, 111th Cong., 2d sess. (January 4, 2011).

280

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

BOX 7-1
Allergen Control Plans in the Packaged Foods Industry
To protect consumers with food allergy, food manufacturing companies
need to implement comprehensive allergen control plans (ACPs). For products
regulated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), in addition to good
manufacturing practices, food companies have been required since 2005 to have
hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCPa) written plans. Presumably,
companies have considered food allergens as a hazard in their HACCP plans
or prerequisite programs.b In addition, over the past two decades and together
with the increasing recognition of the public health importance of food allergy,
many, but not all, companies that manufacture Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-regulated foods have developed and implemented comprehensive ACPs.
ACPs began to be adopted from the mid-1990s (Deibel et al., 1997) and were
rather widely adopted in the United States by the mid-2000s (Taylor et al., 2006).
This industry-led initiative will become a requirement when the FDA Preventive
Controls for Human Foods Rule, part of the 2010 Food Safety Modernization Act
(FSMA), is implemented late in 2016. The Preventive Control for Human Foods
Rule established food allergens as a hazard that is reasonably likely to occur
within food processing facilities. Thus, as the rule becomes fully implemented by
the FDA, food companies will be expected to hone their ACPs.
The following are the ideal steps in a comprehensive ACP. The development
of an ACP starts with a facility hazard and risk assessment done by the food
manufacturer. The first step is the identification of the hazard, which would be all
sources of allergenic foods. This assessment starts with an assessment of all raw
materials to identify those that are allergenic foods or ingredients derived from
allergenic foods. Any allergenic raw materials must then be segregated in receiving, storage, and handling that occurs ahead of processing. Ingredient suppliers
are expected to have adequate ACPs and are periodically audited for compliance.
Segregation must then be maintained through processing, packaging, and labeling of the finished food product. During processing and packaging, segregation

tion of this approach, a food company might decide to harmonize certain
ingredients across all products made on shared equipment. For example,
if a food company made 30 different cake mixes on shared equipment and
27 of those cake mixes contained milk ingredients, they could decide to
add milk to the other three formulations. Consumers have been known to
protest harmonization efforts because this decision can eliminate popular
food products from the diets of consumers with specific food allergies. Each
of these “allergen-gating” decisions would be advantageous to the company
because it would avoid additional costs and reduce the complexity of the
company’s ACP.
With the enhanced awareness of food allergies among consumers,

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

281

can be accomplished by separation in either space or time. With separation in
space, allergen-containing formulations can be processed on separate lines or
even in separate facilities from other formulations that do not contain the specific
allergen. Dedicated facilities or dedicated equipment are used in feasible situations. With separation in time, the scheduling of different formulations with varying allergen content is managed. For example, a wheat-containing product might
be run first, followed by wheat plus milk, and finished with wheat plus milk plus
peanut. After the most complex formulation, the shared equipment is cleaned to
remove allergen residues. The critical control pointsc within the manufacturing
operation are identified and monitored to prevent unintentional cross-contact.
The cleaning of shared equipment and facilities is a critical component of the
ACP because allergen residues must be removed after the manufacturing of an
allergenic food product. With the scale of food processing equipment, allergen
cleaning can be daunting in some situations. Understandably, the control of allergens in processing facilities and along the food chain is extremely complex
and beyond the scope of this document. However, the essence of ACPs can be
reviewed in several documents including an on-line brochure (www.http://farrp.unl.
edu/allergen-control-food-industry [accessed January 5, 2017]).
a Hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) is a systematic management approach to food safety from biological, chemical, and physical hazards in production processes.
It includes tools to reduce these risks to a safe level and it focuses on prevention at all stages
of the food chain and processes rather than on inspection of the finish product. The Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) require mandatory
HACCP programs for juice, seafood, and meat as an effective approach to food safety and
protecting public health.
b Prerequisite programs are practices and conditions needed before and during the implementation of HACCP, such as Good Manufacturing Practices or Pest Control Programs, and
which are essential for food safety
c Critical control point (CCP) is a point in the food manufacturing operation where the
failure of a standard operating procedure (SOP) could cause harm to consumers and to the
business, or even loss of the business.

marketing interest has grown in the development of “free-from” foods.
Dairy-free3 and gluten-free products have been marketed for years, but their
availability and popularity with consumers has increased greatly recently.
Now, some foods are marketed as peanut-free, peanut- and tree nut–free
(nut-free), and allergen-free, which typically means the absence of all of the
eight most allergenic foods and food groups (milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts,
wheat, soybean, fish, and crustacean shellfish).
Of course, producing allergen-free food precludes the need to develop
and implement ACPs if done in a facility dedicated to allergen-free food
3 It should be noted that dairy-free and nondairy foods may contain caseins, the major al­
lergenic proteins in cow milk.

282

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

manufacturing. However, the chief reason for the expanding commercial
interest in “free-from” foods is the opportunity to exploit a profitable niche
market. In such cases, the involved food companies must exercise extreme
vigilance to assure that their suppliers do not have the allergens of interest
in any of the ingredients and perhaps even in their facilities. Although some
companies do make “free-from” products in facilities where the allergens
of interest are also present in other formulations, great care must be taken
to assure that no cross-contact occurs under those circumstances.
LABELING OF FOOD ALLERGENS
As described above, the label on a food package is a tool that ideally
should alert consumers of the presence of specific allergens so they can
make informed decisions about the level of risk they are willing to take.
Two types of labeling exist and they serve two distinct purposes: (1) manda­
tory labeling, used when the allergen is intentionally added as an ingredi­
ent; and (2) voluntary labeling, used when the allergen may inadvertently
be in the food as a result of cross-contact. Even when ACPs (see Box 7-1)
are strictly followed, errors occur that might result in the presence of low
levels of the allergen in the formulated food (i.e., residue). This is shown in
part by the number of food recalls that are due to undeclared allergens in
food products (see Box 7-2). Such unintentional allergens, when the pos­
sible cross-contact is predictable, can be identified on the labels of packaged
foods using PAL statements, such as “May Contain X.” Although PAL
statements on packaged food are voluntary, the FDA has indicated that they
should be truthful and not misleading.
The food industry, however, lacks the ability to conduct allergen risk
assessments to determine threshold doses and safe levels. As a result of
the uncertainties regarding limits necessary to avoid cross-contact as well
as unacceptable risks that could result in litigation, PAL statements have
proliferated. They are now applied to a wide range of products, includ­
ing products that likely pose little risk to consumers with a food allergy.
Another result of this uncertainty is that the majority of food recalls in
the United States are now due to undeclared food allergens (see Box 7-2).
Recalls, however, can happen for numerous reasons and are not limited
to cross-contact. Important lessons can be learned from product recalls if
information is shared about root causes, preventive and corrective actions
that are implemented to prevent recurrences, and consumer complaints.
The mandatory ingredient labeling of packaged foods is a government
regulatory issue. Despite the fact that PAL is voluntary, its widespread use
invites regulatory limitations. If government chooses to move forward, it
would have to answer several questions, such as: What allergens should
be labeled? What criteria to identify allergens should appear on a label?

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

283

BOX 7-2
Packaged Food Recalls
Beginning in the early 1990s, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) began
to recognize that food allergies were a public health priority for the United States.
The FDA recognized that the ingredient label on packaged food products provided essential information to consumers following avoidance diets. Food industry
awareness of the importance of accuracy in the labeling of food allergens in food
ingredient labeling emerged simultaneously. As a result, recalls of packaged food
products with undeclared allergens began to occur at an increasing rate. By 1999,
36 percent of all FDA recalls in the United States were associated with undeclared
allergens (Vierk et al., 2002). More recently, undeclared allergens became the
leading cause for Reportable Food Registry (RFR) reports to the FDA (Gendel,
2014). Many of these RFR reports led to product recalls. Undeclared allergens
also have become one of the leading causes of meat and poultry product recalls
occurring under the auspices of the USDA’s Food Safety and Inspection Service
(FSIS). Undeclared allergens also have become a leading cause of food product
recalls in Canada (Zarkadas et al., 1999).
These recalls reveal that, despite the allergen control efforts of the food industry, errors do continue to occur that potentially can affect the health of consumers with a food allergy. Several root causes are involved in these product recalls,
including placement of a product in the wrong package, inappropriate labeling
terminology (e.g., casein not identified as from milk), failure to carry forward
information from an ingredient to the final product, cross-contact occurring within
the manufacturing facility, and mislabeling of an ingredient by a supplier (Gendel,
2014). In some cases, food manufacturers recognize their error and initiate recalls
before consumer complaints have been received; in some of these situations, the
level of undeclared allergen in the product may be insufficient to pose a hazard. In
other cases, regulatory inspections can reveal labeling issues that result in recalls,
especially in the case of FSIS, where continuous federal inspection occurs. The
percentage of product recalls that are initiated as a result of consumer complaints
of allergic reactions is unclear. Product recalls clearly indicate that there is room
for improvement in allergen control within the food processing industry.

Although the discussion below is centered on the United States, policies in
other countries are also described to illustrate the global diversity in the
criteria used and lists of major allergens. For the packaged food industry,
labeling is a matter of compliance with regulatory requirements, includ­
ing the variable requirements of different countries. As more allergens are
added to the priority lists, the complexity of ACPs increases for the food
industry.

284

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Which Allergens Need to Be Labeled?
A Historical Perspective
Many countries have implemented laws, regulations, or standards spe­
cifically governing food allergen labeling for a list of priority allergenic
foods. The foods on such lists vary around the world due to several factors,
including differing eating habits and differing criteria to select the priority
allergenic foods (see Table 7-1). Likewise, the regulatory framework for the
labeling of allergenic foods differs from country to country (Gendel, 2012),
which can affect individuals as they travel between countries.
Increased attention to the labeling of allergenic foods emerged within
the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC)4 in 1993, when a working
paper on food allergens was developed by the Nordic countries. This work­
ing paper led to the creation of a Food and Agricultural Organization of
the United Nations (FAO) Technical Consultation in 1995 that was charged
with developing a list of priority foods that cause food allergies and sensi­
tivities. Ultimately, the priority foods list promulgated by the FAO Techni­
cal Consultation was adopted by CAC in 1999 and continues to serve as
guidance to all countries (individual countries have the option to adopt this
list or to modify the list as they might choose).
Part of the background discussion that occurred within the 1995 FAO
Technical Consultation has been reported by Taylor and Baumert (2015).
They reported that, in 1995, the amount of published information available
to the FAO Technical Consultation concerning the comparative prevalence
of allergies to specific foods was limited largely to pediatric populations,
with virtually no information on the prevalence of food allergy among
adults. Comparative prevalence was the main criterion of the FAO Tech­
nical Consultation, although the differential severity of certain allergenic
foods also was recognized as a criterion. In 1999, a revised CAC priority
was released. As a consequence of data gaps, expert judgment was used,
in part, to develop this list. The 1999 CAC priority list included milk, egg,
fish, crustacean shellfish, peanut, soybean, tree nuts, cereal grain sources
of gluten, and sulfites. Several of these items were added because the FAO
Technical Consultation also considered celiac disease, intolerances, and
sensitivity reactions in addition to immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated food
allergies in its deliberations. For example, gluten was included because of
its association with celiac disease. Sulfites were added because of the docu­
mented severity of sulfite-induced asthma.
Following this, a Task Force of the International Life Sciences Institute­
4 Codex Alimentarius Commission is an organization formed jointly by the Food and Ag­
ricultural Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) to develop food
standards and guidelines that would be recognized worldwide.

X

X

Wheat

Soybean

X

Xa

X

Xa

X

includes foods that are not required, but are on a recommended labeling list include salmon, salmon roe, mackerel, abalone, squid, beef, pork,
chicken, soybean, walnut, orange, kiwi, banana, peach, apple, yam, matsutake mushroom, and gelatin.
b See Box 7-3.
SOURCE: Taylor and Baumert, 2015.

a Japan: Shrimp and crab are the only crustacea on the list. Grains include wheat and buckwheat but not other cereal sources of gluten. Other

Xa

X

Lupine

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Japan
X

X

X

Celery

Canada
X

Other

X

Mustard

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Australia/
New Zealand

Buckwheat

X

Molluscs

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

European Union

Sesame seed

X

X

Peanut

Gluten

X

X

Tree nutsb

X

X

Fish

Egg

Crustacea

X

X

Milk

X

X

Food

USA

Codex
Alimentarius
Commission

TABLE 7-1 Priority Allergenic Food Lists

285

286

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Europe (ILSI-EU) conducted a more thorough assessment of foods that
warranted placement on a list of priority allergenic foods (Bousquet et
al., 1998). The criteria used by the ILSI-EU group included published
evidence of severe or fatal anaphylactic reactions. The ILSI-EU Task Force
recommended a priority food allergens list that included milk, egg, fish,
crustacean shellfish, peanut, soy, tree nuts, wheat, and sesame seed. Other
groups within ILSI-EU have continued to develop criteria for the selection
of allergenic foods of public health importance and have recently recom­
mended that the criteria should encompass consideration of prevalence,
severity and potency5 (Bjorksten et al., 2008; Houben et al., 2016; van
Bilsen et al., 2011).
In the United States, the priority list of allergenic foods was established
by the Congress with the passage of the Food Allergen Labeling and Con­
sumer Protection Act6,7 (FALCPA) of 2004. The FALCPA list mirrored the
1999 CAC list except that the FALCPA list did not address celiac disease
and therefore did not recognize cereal sources of gluten as major allergenic
foods.
In the European Union (EU), the first priority list of allergenic foods
was established by EC Directive 2003/898 as a result of deliberations
within the EU Parliament. The initial EU list included the eight foods or
food groups from the CAC list, but also included sesame seed, mustard,
and celery.9 In addition to allergenic foods, the EU list also includes cereal
sources of gluten and sulfites. Subsequently, the EU priority list of allergenic
foods was updated by EC Directive 2007/6810 and included the addition
of molluscan shellfish and lupine to the EU list based on the opinion of the
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) Panel Scientific Panel on Dietetic
Products, Nutrition, and Allergies (EFSA, 2005, 2006). The decision to
include lupine appeared to be based on the recognition that some peanutallergic individuals will experience allergic reactions on ingestion of lupine
due to the presence of cross-reacting allergens in these two legumes.
5 Prevalence is defined as the percentage of the general population who have a clinically
confirmed allergic reaction to a specific food. Severity is defined as the frequency of occur­
rence of fatal or life-threatening allergic reactions to a specific food. Potency is defined as
the minimal eliciting dose or threshold dose needed to provoke objective symptoms among
individuals allergic to a specific food.
6 For an analysis on Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act see Derr, 2006.
7 Public Law 282, 108th Cong., 2d sess. (August 2, 2004).
8 See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32003L0089 (accessed July
3, 2016).
9 “Celery” in the EU priority list of food allergens refers to “celery root.” Celery root and
celery stalk are marketed as foods derived from different varieties of Apium graveolens. Al­
lergy to celery root is frequent in some European countries but not in the United States.
10 See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1467581123948&uri=CELEX:32
007L0068 (accessed July 3, 2016).

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

287

In Canada, the priority allergen list includes the eight foods and food
groups on the 1999 CAC list plus molluscan shellfish, sesame seeds, and
mustard. Australia and New Zealand were the first countries to develop
a priority list of allergenic foods that includes sesame seeds in addition to
the 1999 CAC list.
Japan uses a unique approach, with a short mandatory labeling list and
a longer recommended labeling list. The mandatory priority list includes
wheat, milk, egg, peanut, buckwheat, and crustacean shellfish. Among the
crustacean shellfish, only crab and shrimp are identified on the Japanese
list. Japan and Korea are the only countries to include buckwheat on
their priority allergen lists. Buckwheat can cause frequent and occasionally
severe allergies in countries where buckwheat (soba) noodles are frequently
consumed (Akiyama et al., 2011). The recommended priority list in Japan
is lengthy, including several molluscan shellfish (abalone, squid), several
fish (mackerel, salmon, and salmon roe), several fruits (orange, kiwi, peach,
apple, banana), one tree nut (walnut), several meats (pork, chicken, beef),
soybean, matsutake mushroom, yam, and gelatin. A survey of Japanese
allergy clinics on the causative foods in more than 1,500 cases of food
allergy was used as the basis for the priority list in Japan (Ebisawa, 2003).
As previously noted, many countries simply refer to the 1999 CAC list
in their food labeling regulations. A few countries (Argentina, Switzerland,
Ukraine) have adopted the EU regulatory framework instead (Gendel,
2012).
How Should Foods Be Selected for Priority Allergen Lists?
Initially, the CAC sought expert opinion and attempted to use the
available scientific information in establishing the 1999 list of priority
allergenic foods. Although the list of eight priority allergenic foods or food
groups established by the CAC remains valid in general, the list has not
been reviewed since 1999 and it should be reconsidered now and peri­
odically thereafter. As mentioned, scientific and clinical data regarding the
prevalence of allergies to specific foods were insufficient. In particular, data
were missing on the prevalence of specific food allergies in adults and the
variability in the prevalence of specific food allergies between countries.
Allergies to some foods that are common in young children are much less
prevalent among adults (e.g., milk, egg, wheat, soy) (Boyce et al., 2010) (see
Chapter 3). Based on self-report, soybean allergy appears to be relatively
frequent among young infants in the United States (Gupta et al., 2011), but
they tend to outgrow this allergy within a few years (Savage et al., 2010). A
systematic review (Nwaru et al., 2014) showed soy allergy to be generally
lower than previously thought in the general population when oral food

288

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

challenge was used as the method of assesment, but none of the data was
collected in the United States (see Chapter 3).
In general, data are lacking on the comparative prevalence of allergies
to specific foods among adults. This knowledge gap should be addressed
and prevalence data on the overall population also should be considered
so that priority allergenic foods for regulatory purposes can be identified.
A logical next question is whether any foods should be added to this
global priority list. Certain foods and food groups are considered major
allergens in some countries but not others (e.g., sesame seed, molluscan
shellfish, mustard, buckwheat, lupine). The decisions about the placement
(or removal) of additional allergenic foods on global priority lists should be
based on scientific evidence regarding the prevalence, severity, and potency
of allergies to those specific foods. Individual countries may have justifi­
able reasons for expanding this list due to cultural dietary habits but
such decisions also should be made on the basis of scientific and clinical
evidence. For example, in the United States, the priority list of allergenic
foods established by Congress is currently undergoing a legislative review,
and the addition of sesame seeds is being considered. This decision should
be based on scientific and clinical evidence of the prevalence, severity, and
potency of sesame seed allergy compared to allergies to the existing eight
foods or food groups. The prevalence of sesame seed allergy in the United
States appears to be equivalent to the existing eight priority foods or food
groups recognized in the United States among children (Gupta et al., 2013).
Insufficient evidence exists on the prevalence and severity of allergies
to other foods on the lists of priority allergenic foods in other countries,
including molluscan shellfish, mustard, celery root, and buckwheat, to
warrant their addition to the priority list in the United States. However,
alterations in consumer eating habits could increase the prevalence of aller­
gies to these or perhaps other foods. So, the list of priority allergenic foods
should remain dynamic and subject to change as new data on prevalence
and severity might dictate (see Box 7-3).
Ingredient Labeling of Allergens
Ingredient labels on packaged food products are particularly critical
to consumers with food allergies who are attempting to follow an allergen
avoidance diet. In most countries, the ingredient statement on packaged
food products must include the names of all foods (e.g., milk) and ingredi­
ents (e.g., caseinate) that are added deliberately and that have a technical
or functional effect in the finished food product. However, the allergenic
source of the ingredient (e.g., milk) cannot always be readily discerned from
its common or usual name appearing on ingredient lists (e.g., caseinate).
To help U.S. consumers with this information, FALCPA requires that the

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

289

BOX 7-3
What Specific Fish, Crustacean Shellfish, and
Tree Nuts Are Considered Major Allergenic Foods?
Fish and Crustacean Shellfish. In most countries, fish is used to include all
species of finfish with the exception of Japan, where only mackerel and salmon
are included on the recommended priority list for allergenic foods. Similarly, most
countries include all species of shrimp, crab, and lobster among the crustacean
shellfish, with the exception of Japan. In several countries, including Canada,
the labeling regulations refer only to shellfish and do not specifically distinguish
between crustacean shellfish and molluscan shellfish.
Tree nuts. The identification of which tree nuts merit recognition as part of
the group covered by the priority allergen labeling regulations differs widely among
various countries. As noted, only walnut appears on the priority allergenic foods
list in Japan. In Europe for regulatory purposes, tree nuts include walnuts, pecans,
cashews, pistachios, almonds, hazelnuts, Brazil nuts, and macadamia nuts. In
Canada, those same eight nuts plus pine nuts are listed. In the United States, the
Congress did not identify the specific tree nuts that required mandatory labeling
under the provisions of Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of
2004 (FALCPA), leaving the decision to the discretion of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). An FDA guidance document released in 2006 included a very
long list of 19 tree nuts that would need to be specifically included on U.S. food
labels. The nine tree nuts on the Canadian list were included and clinical evidence
exists of allergic reactions occurring to all of those nuts. However, scientific and
clinical evidence supporting the inclusion of the other 10 tree nuts on the U.S. list
is lacking. Unfortunately, this list includes coconut and litchi, which are not tree
nuts. Coconuts grow on palms that are distantly related to the dicotyledonous
trees that produce the 8 or 9 nuts that are on the lists in Canada and the European
Union. Litchi is a fruit. Although clinical evidence exists of allergies to coconut and
litchi, scant evidence exists of any cross-reactivity between coconut or litchi with
any of the other eight or nine tree nuts.

source should be clearly indicated if the ingredient was derived from a food
on the priority allergenic foods list. Examples include labeling caseinate
as “caseinate (milk),” whey as “whey (milk),” gluten as “gluten (usually
wheat),” glucose syrup as “glucose syrup (occasionally wheat),” semolina
as “semolina (wheat),” and lecithin as “lecithin (often soy).” Similar legisla­
tion does not exist in many countries.
Exemptions
Flavors, spices, or processing aid Artificial or natural flavors, spices, col­
ors, or processing aids (i.e., minor ingredients that have no technical or

290

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

functional effect in the finished product) are often exempt from labeling
requirements, which could affect consumers with food allergies. Flavors can
occasionally contain allergenic proteins, although at a rather low level, so
they have caused only a few documented episodes (Taylor and Dormedy,
1998). Spices are not commonly allergenic, with possible exception of
mustard and sesame seed. In addition, some colors, such as carmine and
annatto, contain proteins that have caused allergic reactions (Lucas et al.,
2001). In the United States, certain ingredients can be grouped as “spices,”
“flavors,” “natural flavors,” “artificial flavors,” and “artificial colors.”
In the United States, to circumvent the possibility of a hidden allergen in
such ingredients, the priority allergenic foods must be declared if they are
contained in flavors, spices, colors, or processing aids.
Ingredients with low levels of allergenic protein Ingredients derived from
allergenic sources contain widely different levels of allergenic protein
(Taylor and Hefle, 2000). Some ingredients, such as casein, whey, and
gluten, contain substantial amounts of specific allergenic proteins from
the allergenic source. In contrast, a few examples of ingredients, such as
fish gelatin, contain substantial protein from the allergenic source but
the protein fraction in the ingredient does not include much of the major
allergen from the source (Koppelman et al., 2012). Other ingredients from
priority allergenic sources contain low to moderate levels of protein. Foodgrade lactose may contain as much as 1 percent milk protein, although the
amount of protein in lactose will depend upon the method of manufacture
of this ingredient. Lactose with 1 percent milk protein likely has sufficient
milk allergens to provoke allergic reactions, so its clear identification as a
milk-derived ingredient on food labels is prudent. However, some ingredi­
ents from priority allergenic sources contain no detectable protein or very
low levels of detectable proteins. Examples include highly refined oils from
soybeans and peanuts, soy lecithin, wheat starch, and several milk-derived
flavors (butter oil, butter ester, butter acid, starter distillate).
Due to this variation in levels of allergen content, in a few countries,
selected ingredients are exempted from source labeling. In the United States,
highly refined oils were exempted by Congress when it passed FALCPA.
Congress also established a regulatory process under FALCPA where food
ingredient manufacturers could petition for source labeling exemptions.
Under that process, only one successful petition to the FDA has occurred
for a source labeling exemption and that was for the use of specific soy
lecithin ingredients when used as a processing aid as a stick-release agent
in bakeries.
In the EU, the initial directive provided a means for companies to peti­
tion for source labeling exemptions for specific ingredients derived from
the priority allergens. In this process, petitions were evaluated by the EFSA

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

291

Panel of Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies and several ingredients
were exempted from source labeling requirements but often only for specific
purposes (see Box 7-4). Although the EU appears to have the highest num­
ber of source labeling exemptions, it does not appear to have established
a permanent process to seek further exemptions in a manner similar to the
United States.
Australia and New Zealand have considered the necessity of labeling
the fish origin of isinglass, an ingredient used in the clarification of alco­
holic beverages, including wines. Isinglass, which is comprised of collagen
derived from fish swim bladders, contains little detectable parvalbumin, the
major fish allergen and is exempt from source labeling in the EU (Weber
et al., 2009). Currently, Australia and New Zealand are also not requiring
the declaration of isinglass or its fish origin on labels of alcoholic bever­
ages. Very recently, Food Standards Australia and New Zealand exempted
the source labeling of fully refined soybean oil, glucose syrup from wheat,
tocopherols (including vitamin E), and phytosterols from soybeans, and
distilled alcohol11 from wheat or whey (Food Standards Australia New
Zealand, 2015).
Voluntary Precautionary Allergen Labeling
The existing regulations in most countries focus on intentionally added
ingredients as described above. However, greater public health concerns
exist regarding the potential that residues of allergenic foods may occur
inadvertenly as the result of cross-contact due to common food industry
practices such as the use of shared equipment. Such practices can result
in the presence of detectable levels of allergen residues in various foods.
As mentioned above, to avoid risks due to cross-contact contamination of
food allergens, the food industry has made a concerted effort by implement­
ing voluntary ACPs (see Box 7-1) in their manufacturing processes. For
the most part, these plans rely on segregation and cleaning procedures to
remove allergens, but errors do occur occasionally. In addition, for prod­
ucts regulated by the FDA, preventive control plans were not required until
FSMA rules were final in 2015 and therefore ACPs were not developed
across all food manufacturing companies.
Therefore, even with strict allergen control plans, it is not possible to
ensure that a product will be free of allergens (unless the product is designed
to be allergen-free). One approach to inform consumers about the risk of
food allergens in a food product is through the use of an advisory label on
11 Alcoholic beverages in the United States are mostly regulated by TTB (Tax & Trade
Bureau), and allergen labeling is not clearly mandated. TTB does generally follow the FDA
approaches but is not required to do so. Isinglass is not typically labeled in the United States.

292

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

BOX 7-4
Ingredients with Source Labeling
Exemption in the European Union
Cereals
• Wheat-based glucose syrups including dextrosea
• Wheat-based maltodextrinsa
• Glucose syrups based on barley
• Cereals used for making distillated or ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin
for spirit drinks and other alcoholic beverages
Fish Products
• Fish gelatin used as a carrier for vitamin or carotenoid preparations
• Fish gelatin or isinglass used as a refining agent in beer and wine
Soybean Products
• Fully refined soybean oil and fata
• Natural mixed tocopherols (E306), natural D-alpha tocopherol, natural
D-alpha tocopherol acetate, natural D-alpha tocopherol succinate from
soybean sources
• Vegetable oils derived from phytosterols and phytosterol esters from
soybean sources
• Plant stanol ester produced from vegetable oil sterols from soybean
sources
Milk and Milk Products
• Whey used for making distillates or ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin for
spirit drinks and other alcoholic beverages
• Lactitol
Nuts

•

Nuts used for making distillates or ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin for
spirit drinks and other alcoholic beverages

a And the products thereof, in so far as the process that they have undergone is not likely
to increase the level of allergenicity assessed by the Authority for the relevant product from
which they originated.
SOURCE: Adapted from European Commission. Directive 2007/68/EC, Official Journal of 28
November 2007, L 310, pp. 11-14. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1467
581123948&uri=CELEX:32007L0068 (accessed July 3, 2016).

the packages. Increasingly, food companies in many countries are providing
consumers with voluntary PAL statements to alert them to products that
are at risk of inadvertent allergen contamination. PAL is not required in
any country; instead, many countries (United States, EU-member nations,

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

293

Canada, Australia, and New Zealand) have allowed its voluntary use on
packaged foods and, if a company decides to display PAL, some countries
do mandate certain forms of PAL. Partly because it is not regulated, dif­
ferent forms of PAL are employed by various food companies worldwide
(Taylor and Baumert, 2010). For example, Canada uses “may contain X,”
while the United Kingdom uses “not suitable for X allergy sufferers.” In
the United States, which has no standard form for PAL, three formats pre­
dominate: (a) “may contain X,” (b) “manufactured on shared equipment
with X” and (c) “manufactured in shared facility with X,” (Hefle et al.,
2007; Pieretti et al., 2009).
Many problems are acknowledged with the current voluntary PAL
approach (Allen et al., 2014b; DunnGalvin et al., 2015). First, food compa­
nies do not have the capability to determine which allergen levels in foods
might be hazardous and, therefore, PAL, as currently implemented, does
not correlate with risk. This is shown by analytical surveys of products
both with and without PAL indicating that many products having PAL do
not contain detectable allergen levels while some products without PAL
do contain detectable allergen levels (Crotty and Taylor, 2010; Ford et al.,
2010; Hefle et al., 2007; Pele et al., 2007; Remington et al., 2013a, 2015;
Robertson et al., 2013; Zurzolo et al., 2013). Thus, evidence suggests that
food companies are both overusing and underusing PAL (DunnGalvin et al.,
2015). Second, various stakeholders, including consumers, food industry
management professionals, health care professionals, psychologists, food
industry auditors, analysts, and regulatory professionals, agree that PAL
has lost its credibility due to its inconsistent application and lack of asso­
ciation with actual risk (DunnGalvin et al., 2015). Stakeholders agree that
PAL should bear a relationship to actual risk and that the decision-making
criteria for application of such labeling should be transparent to all stake­
holders (DunnGalvin et al., 2015). Additionally, if PAL is applied in some
risk-based coordinated manner, then some mechanism should be provided
on the food label to indicate that the food has been evaluated for PAL but
that no PAL statement is needed. Otherwise, consumers with a food allergy
will never know whether the packaged food lacks a PAL statement because
it does not need one or because the food manufacturing company did not
apply the risk assessment process.
A NEW PARADIGM:
AVOIDING FOOD ALLERGENS AT LEVELS THAT PRESENT RISKS
Avoiding Allergens Is Important
There is no question that avoidance diets remain essential to prevent
adverse reactions among individuals with a food allergy (de Silva et al.,

294

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

2014; Sampson et al., 2014). However, as Chapter 6 reflects, there are
special situations where, under medical consultation, non-strict allergen
avoidance is also an option. Whether an individual needs to avoid the food
strictly or not, foods that pose a meaningful risk to those with food aller­
gies should be adequately labeled. As already explained in Chapters 1 and
6, consumers are not adequately informed about food allergies in general
and about the risks of packaged foods in particular. Partly because of the
absence of a labeling approach that informs about food allergy risks, all
individuals with food allergy are given the same advice, namely that they
should completely avoid the offending food(s). This situation has conse­
quences for the food industry (e.g., foods that are made in shared facilities
that pose almost no risk to consumers with a food allergy still carry a PAL)
and for individuals with food allergy (e.g., some individuals who are cur­
rently following a strict avoidance diet could in reality safely ingest low lev­
els of the allergen). However, a more meaningful, evidence-based approach
is possible. In reality, individuals with one or more food allergies should
avoid only the specific food(s) that have allergen levels sufficient to trigger
their conditions. A risk assessment approach would lead to a decrease in
the occurrence of allergic reactions while maximizing the quality of life of
individuals with a food allergy.
However, Low Doses of Allergenic Foods
May Not Always Pose a Problem
The first evidence that individuals with food allergy could safely be
exposed to low doses of allergens perhaps occurred with the develop­
ment of hypoallergenic infant formulas for infants with milk allergy. With
some exceptions, oral food challenges (OFCs) with hypoallergenic infant
formulas derived from cow milk in infants with cow milk allergy do not
generally lead to adverse reactions to the formula under study (AAP, 2000).
Similar findings were published for highly refined peanut oil (Hourihane
et al., 1997b) and codfish oil (Hansen et al., 2004). Evidence now clearly
demonstrates that individuals with a food allergy have threshold doses
below which they will not experience adverse reactions (Buchanan et al.,
2007; Hourihane et al., 1997a; Jones et al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2010). It
also is known that considerable individual variability occurs in the minimal
amounts of the offending food that are needed to provoke allergic reactions,
ranging from 0.1 mg up to as much as 10 g for peanut (Taylor et al., 2010).
Furthermore, the dose of the food allergen directly affects the likeli­
hood and the severity of an allergic reaction. Different individuals with
the same food allergy (e.g., peanut) have different minimal reactive doses
(known as threshold doses) for the allergenic food (Bindslev-Jensen et al.,
2002; Taylor et al., 2009). However, no evidence indicates that sensitiv­

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

295

ity and severity are related, that is, the most sensitive individuals are not
always the ones who experience more frequent severe reactions. In fact,
small (sometimes very small) doses have a lesser impact. For cow milk and
egg, low milligram (mg) doses can provoke severe reactions in some chil­
dren with allergy but the percentage of children experiencing severe reac­
tions increases as the challenge dose increases (Rolinck-Werninghaus et al.,
2012). The dose-severity relationship may vary among allergenic foods, as
wheat and soy challenges are unlikely to provoke severe reactions at initial
low challenge doses (Rolinck-Werninghaus et al., 2012).
A NEW APPROACH TO CREATING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT:
THE RISK ASSESSMENT CONCEPT
Risk analysis is the overall process for controlling situations in which
an organism, system, or given population could be exposed to a hazard.
The risk analysis process has three components: risk assessment, risk man­
agement, and risk communication (IPCS, 2004). Risk assessment, devel­
oped by the National Research Council (NRC, 1980), is the process that
serves to estimate the risk to a given target organism, system, or population,
including the identification of attendant uncertainties following exposure
to a particular agent. Risk assessment also takes into account the inher­
ent characteristics of the agent of concern as well as the characteristics of
the specific target (e.g., a given population) (IPCS, 2004). For allergenic
foods, risk assessment would estimate the level of risk to a population of
individuals with a specific food allergy based on exposure to that food and
would allow risk managers throughout the food chain, including public
health authorities, to define an acceptable levels of risk (e.g., that 1 percent
of individuals with food allergy will have mild reactions). If the risk needs
to be mitigated (i.e., when the risk is higher than an established acceptable
level of risk), appropriate interventions will follow (i.e., risk management),
together with communication of that risk to affected individuals (i.e., risk
communication).
Public health authorities have generally applied the risk assessment
concept to determine the public health risk from chemical or microbiologi­
cal contaminants on a population basis (e.g., aflatoxin levels in oilseeds
and grains; arsenic levels in infant rice cereals; mercury levels in seafoods).
The FDA has used risk assessment principles of increasing sophistication
for many years. Although the appropriateness of using these concepts in the
setting of allergenic foods was questionable in the past, improved under­
standing of the mechanism for allergic reactions to food, together with
emerging data from individuals with food allergy has led to the realization
that the classical principles, terminology, and methodologies of chemical
toxicology risk assessment can be applied to food allergens. A common,

296

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

in-depth understanding of the risk assessment terminology and concept is
essential to achieve consensus about conducting the assessment itself and
to define and implement risk management approaches (e.g., labeling) and
risk communication approaches.
Risk assessment incorporates a number of features, which are defined
in Box 7-5, and encompasses four steps: hazard identification, hazard
characterization, exposure assessment, and risk characterization, which are
defined in Box 7-6.
Application of Risk Assessment to Allergenic Foods
As noted, the risk assessment process can be applied to allergenic foods.
Although its general features are similar to those used for chemical hazards,
a few unique differences exist and are highlighted in this section. Further
details about the data inputs, their characteristics and limitations can be
found in the Annex to this chapter.
Hazard Identification
The allergen (hazard) is identified through case reports of adverse reac­
tions in humans and can be confirmed with clinical diagnosis (e.g., with clini­
cal OFCs or food-specific IgE antibodies in the serum or tissues of affected
individuals). Unlike the risk assessment process for chemicals, typical experi­
mental animals do not serve as good predictive models for identifying food
allergens to humans (Kimber et al., 2003). Hazard identification also may
include data on the prevalence and severity of the reactions. However, numer­
ous foods, such as peanut, cow milk, and egg, are already widely recognized
as allergenic foods based on prevalence (Gendel, 2012). Several foods, nota­
bly peanut and tree nuts, are recognized as frequent causative factors of
severe allergic reactions in children and adults (Bock et al., 2007). Hazard
identification can include a demonstration that residues of that allergenic
food are present in some food product, especially for allergenic foods known
to be more prevalent and/or severe than other foods. If the allergenic food
residues are not declared on the label of a packaged food, then the potential
hazard is particularly acute. Thus, for packaged foods, an undeclared aller­
genic food is considered the identified hazard.
Hazard Characterization
In the hazard characterization step of food allergy, safe levels of expo­
sure (Reference Doses estimated as protein from the allergenic food) can
be derived from OFC data. Oral food challenges have been used in the
clinical practice of food allergy for several decades as a diagnosis method

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

297

BOX 7-5
Definitions
Acceptable Level of Risk: A risk management decision regarding the degree of
risk that would be acceptable within the affected population.
Hazard: An inherent property of an agent or situation having the potential to cause
adverse effects when an organism, system, or given population is exposed to that
agent (e.g., allergen).
Lowest-Observed-Adverse-Effect Level (LOAEL): The lowest dose of a hazard
(e.g., allergen, expressed as mg of total protein from the allergenic food) that can
provoke an observable reaction in an individual or population. Also known as the
Minimal Eliciting Dose (MED).
No-Observed-Adverse-Effect Level (NOAEL) or Threshold: The highest dose
of a hazard (e.g., allergen, expressed as mg of total protein from the allergenic
food) that will not provoke an observable reaction in an individual or population.
Objective Response: A reaction that can be independently verified by a clinically
trained observer (e.g., urticaria [hives], vomiting, flushing, angioedema).
Reference Dose: The lowest dose of a hazard (e.g., allergen, expressed in milligrams [mg] of total protein from the allergenic source) that is predicted to elicit
symptoms of a reaction when ingested by a defined, small percentage of the
population of individuals who are known to experience adverse reactions to that
hazard.
Risk: The probability of an adverse effect in an organism, system, or (sub)population caused under specified circumstances by exposure to an agent.
Safety: The control of recognized hazards to achieve an acceptable level of risk.
Subjective Response: A mild transitory reaction that cannot be independently
confirmed by a clinically trained observer (e.g., palatal itching or stomach
cramping).

(see also Chapter 4). In addition to their use in diagnosis, low-dose OFCs
are becoming more widely used to identify the most sensitive individuals
and to identify the starting dose for oral immunotherapy trials. The more
widespread use of low-dose OFCs in clinical practice has confirmed the
fact that individuals with food allergy have a threshold dose below which
they ordinarily will not experience an adverse reaction upon ingesting the
allergenic food (Hourihane et al., 1997a; Taylor et al., 2002). Thus, food

298

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

BOX 7-6
Risk Assessment Steps
Hazard Identification and Hazard Characterization (Hazard Assessment)
Hazard identification includes the determination that the substance with the
hazardous properties is present, but also more generally refers to the identification of the type and nature of the adverse effects that an agent can cause in an
organism, system, or given population. In the hazard identification of an allergenic
food, the prevalence and severity of the specific food allergy would be considered.
Hazard characterization includes a description, preferably quantitative, of the
relationship between a dose of the hazard and the effect.
A hazard assessment (involving both hazard identification and hazard characterization) can be used to derive safe levels of exposure, for instance through
the elaboration of a Reference Dose (Crevel et al., 2014; Taylor et al., 2014). Usually, the Reference Dose describes the daily dose that is likely to have no deleterious effect even if continued exposure occurs over a lifetime. For allergenic foods
(with effects that are not cumulative), the Reference Dose would be an amount
of the allergenic food that would pose some defined level of risk (perhaps risk of
mild, transitory allergic symptoms that resolve without pharmacological intervention) that could accrue to a defined percentage of the allergic population (e.g.,
the 1 percent or 5 percent most-sensitive individuals with peanut allergy) (Crevel
et al., 2014; Taylor et al., 2014). Clearly, establishing the appropriate Reference
Dose requires a definition by public health authorities of the acceptable level of
risk that should be allowed.
Exposure Assessment
Dose is a critical parameter to the risk posed by a substance. Thus, exposure
assessment plays an essential role in determining whether the hazardous properties of a substance will translate to adverse health effects. For foods, the exposure
assessment estimates the amounts (or range of amounts) of the hazard that
are likely to be consumed. If these amounts exceed the Reference Dose or the
established maximum level in foods (established using the hazard assessment),
then a risk of adverse health consequences to the exposed (sub)population is
predicted. In contrast, an exposure at or below the Reference Dose or maximum
level in foods is assumed to be safe for the majority of individuals (e.g., for the 99
percent of the population with a food allergy to the specific food). In the case of
food allergens, the Reference Dose could also be used as a benchmark to derive
an action level to determine when PAL should be applied to a product package.
Risk Characterization
Risk characterization can be used to assess the likelihood of risk even in
cases where a Reference Dose or maximum level has not been established. The
risk characterization is the determination of quantitative probability, including attendant uncertainties, that adverse health effects will occur in a given individual
or (sub)population, under defined conditions of exposure.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

299

challenge trials in clinical settings provide human data that can be used for
risk assessment purposes, specifically to establish adverse effects associated
with specific levels of allergenic foods and to derive Reference Doses (Taylor
et al., 2014). Although for each individual, the response is likely related to
the dose of exposure, the full spectrum of adverse responses over a range of
doses cannot be determined due to the ethical concerns about administering
high doses. However, unlike for other hazards, the individual minimal elicit­
ing dose (MED) for sensitive individuals or lowest-observed-adverse-effect
level (LOAEL) can be determined. In addition, the individual threshold, or
no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) can be determined with OFCs.
Determining the true threshold dose for an individual has some caveats.
First, as noted in Chapter 6 and in the Annex to this chapter, multiple
factors can influence the threshold dose for individuals with food allergy.
Although evidence indicates that concurrent viral infections, exercise, and
consumption of alcohol affect an individual’s threshold dose (Crevel et al.,
2014), additional factors could contribute to the variation. Researchers
and clinicians should take these factors into account by performning OFCs
to determine thresholds in controlled settings and counseling patients on
exacerbating factors. Second, because OFCs are conducted using interval
(versus continuous) dosing of the food, the true threshold dose cannot
be exactly determined but lies somewhere between the NOAEL and the
LOAEL for that individual. For example, if the first objective response
occurs at 100 mg but no response occurs at the prior dose of 10 mg, then
for that individual the NOAEL is 10 mg and the LOAEL is 100 mg. How­
ever, the patient’s true threshold dose is somewhere between 10 and 100
mg. Taylor et al. pioneered the use of interval censoring survival analysis
(ICSA) in the dose-distribution modeling of OFC data (Taylor et al., 2009).
ICSA assigns individual thresholds to an interval range rather than a fixed
value by assigning equal probability to the likelihood that the true thresh­
old dose could lie anywhere along that continuum. ICSA allows the use of
first-dose reactors (i.e., their true threshold dose is between zero and the
first dose administered in the challenge trial) and those individuals who
fail to react to any of the challenge doses (i.e., they have a true threshold
dose between the highest dose administered in the trial and infinity) in the
dose-distribution analysis. Questions still remain among stakeholders about
the extent of individual variability despite the lack of evidence supporting
it. Still, in performing the risk assessment, regulators need to take into
account that an individual’s threshold may be lower depending on various
factors, such as use of alcohol, use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
or exercising.
The NOAELs also can be estimated on a population basis, as the larg­
est amount of the allergenic food that will not result in an allergic reaction
when tested experimentally in a defined population individuals with a food

300

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

allergy. With probabilistic modeling, the degree of risk posed by a specific
dose of the allergenic food can be predicted based on the distribution of
individual threshold doses. In this manner, although zero risk cannot be
predicted, acceptable risk levels can be defined by choosing a Reference
Dose (see the following discussion).
Although the data demonstrate the usability of clinical OFCs to esti­
mate Reference Doses for food allergens, methodological considerations,
potential biases, and uncertainty factors should be recognized and are
described in the Annex.
Determining population thresholds for a risk assessment: Dose distribu­
tion and probabilistic modeling The use of probabilistic modeling12 in risk
assessment of food allergens requires the use of individual NOAELs and
LOAELs.
Increasing amounts of quality NOAEL and LOAEL data from clinical
low-dose OFCs from a number of different allergenic foods continue to
become available (Ballmer-Weber et al., 2015; Blom et al., 2013; Dano et
al., 2015). Taylor et al. provide a summary of the data available in 2014
(Taylor et al., 2014).
When estimating the population-based NOAEL, defining the popula­
tion of study is a key aspect because the dose distribution will vary accord­
ing to the population definition and characteristics. For example, the dose
distribution (and the NOAEL) could be affected if patients with a history of
severe reactions are excluded from OFC studies, as happens in some clinics.
However, findings from one study suggest that the predicted eliciting dose
(ED) is similar for individuals with severe reactions and for those with less
severe reactions (Taylor et al., 2010) (see the Annex to this chapter).
From the published clinical literature, individual LOAEL data can be
found from three different types of studies: diagnostic series, threshold
studies, and immunotherapy trials (Allen et al., 2014a; Clark et al., 2009;
Skripak et al., 2008; Taylor et al., 2009). Published studies often report
only the LOAEL but they also report the dosage progression scheme so
that the NOAEL can be discerned as well (Taylor et al., 2009). With fewer
individuals, more uncertainty exists in population threshold estimates.
The greatest improvement in the accuracy of the estimates is achieved by
increasing the number of individuals from 20 up to 60 (Klein Entink et al.,
2014). A large quantity of data (>200 patients) are available for peanut,
milk, egg, and hazelnut (Klein Entink et al., 2014). Data are less available
but still sufficient to support probabilistic modeling approaches for shrimp
(crustacean shellfish), fish, soybean, wheat, cashew, walnut, sesame seed,
12 Probabalistic modeling is a statistical analysis tool that estimates, on the basis of past
(historical) data, the probability of an event occurring again.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

301

lupine, celery root, and mustard (Ballmer-Weber et al., 2015; Blom et al.,
2013; Dano et al., 2015; Taylor et al., 2014). The range of individual
NOAELs and LOAELs for individuals with a food allergy can be quite
broad. For example, in the examination of individual thresholds among 450
individuals with a peanut allergy, the range of individual LOAELs spanned
five orders of magnitude from 0.1 mg up to 2.5 g of peanut protein or 0.4
mg to 10 g of whole peanut (Taylor et al., 2010).
Probabilistic risk assessment (see Figure 7-2) has been performed with
the log-normal, log-logistic and Weibull modeling approaches, as are com­
monly used in other risk assessments. No biological reason exists to favor
one of these models over another. Figure 7-3 presents the three probabilistic
approaches to the dose–response for peanut. The probabilistic models allow
the derivation of an ED, where EDp refers to the dose of total protein from
the allergenic food that is predicted to produce an objective response in

FIGURE 7-2 Figure prepresenting the concept of probabilistic risk assessment. The
area in green represents those individuals who would react because their intake is
above the Reference Dose.
SOURCE: Spanjersberg et al., 2007. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.

302

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

100

Cumulative Percentage of Responses

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.01

0.10

1.00

Log-Normal

100.00
10.00
1000.00
10000.00
Cumulative Dose of Peanut Protein (mg)
Log-Logistic

100000.00

Weibull

FIGURE 7-3 Dose distribution modeling of peanut protein minimum eliciting doses
using log-normal, log-logistic, and Weibull probabilistic models.
SOURCE: Taylor et al., 2014. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.

p percent of the allergic population (Crevel et al., 2007). However, these
approaches do not identify a dose below which no allergic individual would
react (zero risk). The ED estimate can be used to describe the population
threshold or establish Reference Doses; the value of p, however, defines the
acceptable risk, which is a risk management decision. These statistical mod­
els also allow estimation of the 95 percent confidence intervals (CIs) around
any EDp value. The lower 95 percent CI also could be selected as a popula­
tion threshold or Reference Dose as another risk management choice.
Exposure Assessment
Risk is a function of hazard and exposure to the hazard. Thus, exposure
assessment is another component of the overall risk assessment. Because
allergenic foods are required to carry labels whenever they are used as
intentional ingredients, the risk to the consumer is only actually imposed
from exposure to any unintended presence of allergens (e.g., contamination
due to cross-contact). Exposure assessment has two components: the level
of contamination in the food (concentration and frequency) and the intake
(amount and frequency) of the particular food. These two components of

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

303

contamination and intake can be used as inputs in quantitative risk assess­
ment to generate an allergen intake distribution. Because the threshold dose
distribution is given in terms of doses of protein from the allergenic food,
the intake distribution also should be calculated in terms of protein from
the allergenic food. The challenges and considerations in collecting data to
develop an accurate exposure assessment, including validated methods of
detection in food and lack of intake data for consumers with food allergies
are described in the Annex.
Risk Characterization
Risk characterization involves combining the hazard assessment and
exposure assessment approaches to determine the level of risk posed to
consumers with food allergy using selected scenarios. Risk characterization
involves three key input distributions: the dose-distribution of individual
threshold doses, the intake distribution, and the contamination distribution.
Highlighted below are two approaches to conduct a risk characterization:
examining the individual threshold dose-distribution to arrive at acceptable
Reference Doses or using probabilistic modeling.
Using the individual threshold dose-distribution A comparatively sim­
ple strategy can be used by examining the individual threshold dose
distribution to arrive at acceptable Reference Doses. For example, the
dose calculated to elicit an allergic reaction in p percent of allergic indi­
viduals (EDp) can be selected as the Reference Dose. If more caution is
desirable, the dose can be selected to be at the 95 percent lower CI of the
EDp. The selection of the appropriate EDp value is a risk management
decision. Establishing acceptable Reference Doses (or action levels) is a
simple approach to risk characterization. Action levels can easily be cal­
culated by the following formula:
[EDp (in mg) / intake (in kg)] = action level (in mg/kg or ppm)]
If a contamination level is found to be above the action level, then an
appropriate action would be taken. For example, a precautionary label
would be placed on the product or a product recall would be initiated if the
product is already in the market with an undeclared allergen.
When elaborating action levels using this combination of a chosen
food intake level and an EDp value, the choice of the intake level is critical.
Crevel et al. provide an example of bread consumption (Crevel et al., 2014).
For this example, Crevel et al. assume that the EDp has been selected as
the ED1, that peanut is the allergenic food of concern, and that the Refer­
ence Dose is 0.2 mg peanut protein, based on the individual threshold dose

304

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

distribution (Taylor et al., 2014). The portion size for the single serving of
sliced brown wheat bread is given as 35 g but the mean consumption per
meal is 140 g (4 slices) and the 95 percent intake level is 210 g (6 slices).
In calculating the action level using the single serving size, then the action
level would be 5.7 ppm (parts per million) peanut protein. However, if
the mean meal intake level was used, the action level would be 1.4 ppm
peanut protein. If the 95 percent intake level of 210 g was used, the action
level would be 1.0 ppm peanut protein. The selection of the appropriate
consumption level complicates the use of this simplistic risk assessment
approach. An underestimate of consumption amount results in selection of
a higher action level and carries an associated higher level of risk. Action
levels allow risk characterization to be conducted in a very straightforward
manner that allows a definitive risk management decision.
Probabilistic modeling Risk characterization also can be conducted in a
more complex manner using probabilistic modeling as depicted in Figure 7-2
(Crevel et al., 2014; Spanjersberg et al., 2007). In this approach, in addi­
tion to data inputs for allergen thresholds, the consumption patterns and
allergen contamination test results can be fitted to statistical distributions
for use in a Monte Carlo simulation.13 The allergen intake distribution of
a particular product can be determined based on the allergen distribution
in the product (based on analytical testing) and the consumption distribu­
tion (based on surveys). The results can predict objective allergic reactions
in an estimated fraction of the population with food allergy. The frequency
of consumption of a particular type of food can be further incorporated
into the model to obtain an estimate of the allergic population’s risk. The
prevalence of the specific food allergy within the general population can
additionally be incorporated into the model to obtain an estimate of the
overall population risk. This probabilistic modeling approach is gener­
ally considered to be the most thorough way to characterize allergic risks
(Kruizinga et al., 2008; Madsen et al., 2009; Spanjersberg et al., 2007,
2010). Quantitative probabilistic risk assessment has been applied to char­
acterize the allergic risks in several practical examples (Remington et al.,
2013a,b, 2015; Robertson et al., 2013; Spanjersberg et al., 2007, 2010).
Probabilistic modeling inherently accounts for some of the uncertainties
associated with the input variables and reflects those in the probability dis­
tribution for the output (Crevel et al., 2014). However, probabilistic model­
ing does not account for factors, such as systematic bias in the selection of
the challenge population, unless these systematic factors can be quantified.
13 In a Monte Carlo simulation, the program repeatedly samples the three input distribu­
tions, picking a value from each at random and building a distribution representing the
probability of an allergic reaction given the values and distributions of the specified variables.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

305

DEVELOPING POPULATION THRESHOLDS: MOVING FORWARD
Bindslev-Jensen et al. were the first to attempt the use of dosedistribution modeling for allergenic foods (Bindslev-Jensen et al., 2002).
The authors used data on four commonly allergenic foods using individual
threshold doses from the peer-reviewed clinical literature to merely illus­
trate their model. Crevel et al. expanded upon the value of statistical dosedistribution modeling to estimate population thresholds for allergenic foods
and also pointed out the data limitations to use of that approach (Crevel et
al., 2007). In 2006, the FDA, through an ad hoc internal Threshold Work­
ing Group (TWG), evaluated various approaches to establishing population
thresholds for allergenic foods and produced a report with recommenda­
tions (Gendel et al., 2008). The TWG recommended the use of statistical
dose-distribution modeling as the preferred ideal approach for establishing
this threshold. As mentioned, the use of statistical dose-distribution model­
ing relies upon the availability of sufficient quantities of food challenge data
from low-dose clinical OFC studies. The TWG concluded that insufficient
data existed to use this preferred approach. Gendel et al. cited several
concerns with the data that existed before 2005: (1) the general paucity
of data on low-dose challenges for many allergenic foods; (2) the repre­
sentativeness of the populations of individuals with food allergy in those
studies; (3) potential exclusion of individuals with histories of severe reac­
tions; and (4) lack of comparative data to establish the optimal parametric
dose-distribution relationship to use for modeling purposes (Gendel et al.,
2008). The following section describes the progress made over the ensuing
10 years to address those concerns.
Do Sufficient Data Exist?
Since 2005, numerous low-dose challenge studies have been performed
by multiple clinical investigators so that extensive data now exist for mod­
eling purposes (Taylor et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2015). Table 1 in Taylor
et al. provides a list of the number of data points for each of the priority
allergenic foods used to establish Reference Doses as of 2014 (Taylor et
al., 2014). More individual threshold data points exist for peanut, milk,
egg, and hazelnut than for other allergenic foods. Using statistical analysis,
Klein Entink et al. determined that the largest gain in reliability of popula­
tion threshold estimates occurs as the number of data points increases from
N=20 to N=60 (Klein Entink et al., 2014). However, population threshold
estimates can be made from small numbers of subjects provided that the
statistical confidence intervals are included (Taylor et al., 2014). Appro­
priately, the FDA TWG recommended that population threshold estimates
should be adjusted as more individual threshold data are acquired (Gendel
et al., 2008).

306

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Do Subjects with Histories of Severe Reactions Have Lower Thresholds?
Several studies have demonstrated that no relationship exists between
reaction severity by challenge or history and threshold dose (Blumchen et
al., 2014; Eller et al., 2012; Taylor et al., 2010; Turner et al., 2016; Zhu et
al., 2015). Symptom severity increases, however, with increasing challenge
doses for milk and egg (Rolinck-Werninghaus et al., 2012). Several studies
have documented that severe reactions occur on the initial challenge dose
(Perry et al., 2004; Sicherer et al., 2000) but these observations stem from
challenges that were initiated at doses above 100 mg of the allergenic foods
(much higher than the low doses now used in low-dose OFCs). A recent
single-dose study administering the predicted log-normal ED05 dose of
peanut to 375 unselected peanut-allergic individuals documented that 8 of
375 subjects (2.1%) experienced objective responses to this dose and that
none experienced severe reactions (Hourihane et al., In press). Although
peanut is recognized among the allergenic foods as most likely to provoke
severe reactions (Blumchen et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2015), the ED05 dose of
peanut (6 mg whole peanut or 1.5 mg peanut protein) is unlikely to provoke
severe reactions (Hourihane et al., In press).
Do Sufficient Data Exist from a Wide and Varied Enough Population?
Although most low-dose challenge studies have been conducted in
Europe, the United States, or Australia, evidence suggests that thresholds
do not differ on the basis of age or geography (Allen et al., 2014a). Patient
selection bias can affect threshold distributions (Allen et al., 2014a), but
the comparisons show that patients involved in immunotherapy trials tend
to be more highly sensitive, which favors the establishment of conservative
population thresholds. Differences in dosing ranges can affect threshold
distributions (Allen et al., 2014a) but these effects can be lessened by nor­
malizing the data on the basis of protein content (Taylor et al., 2009) and
focusing on data from low-dose studies with initial doses in the low mg
range.
How Much Inter-Individual Variability in Thresholds Exists?
The persistence of individual threshold doses has not been thoroughly
investigated. However, it is well known that infants and children with
milk, egg, soy, and wheat allergies will frequently outgrow their condition
(Keet et al., 2009; Savage et al., 2007, 2010; Skripak et al., 2007). Presum­
ably their individual threshold doses increase over time until tolerance is
achieved although this has not been specifically investigated. Peanut allergy
is more persistent, although about 20 percent of peanut-allergic individu­

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

307

als also outgrow their condition (Skolnick et al., 2001). Individual peanut
thresholds were found to be relatively stable over a period of years and
multiple OFCs with the exception of 6 percent of patients whose peanut
allergy resolved (Crevel et al., 2010). Little scientific evidence exists to sug­
gest that individuals become more sensitive over time, although this is a
point of frequent conjecture.
Which Statistical Models Are Optimal for
Estimating Population Thresholds?
As mentioned above, several parametric models (log-normal, loglogistic, and Weibull) have been compared (Taylor et al., 2009, 2014). For
peanut, the Weibull model offers the most conservative predicted popula­
tion threshold (Taylor et al., 2014), but recent data suggest that the lognormal and log-logistic models are optimal (Hourihane et al., In press). In
this study, the predicted log-normal ED05 dose for peanut was administered
as a single dose to 375 unselected peanut-allergic individuals. Only 2.1
percent of these individuals experienced objective reactions (none severe)
indicating that even the log-normal prediction was overly conservative and
indicating that the extra conservatism predicted by the Weibull model is
unnecessary (Hourihane et al., In press).
With the generation of additional clinical data on individual threshold
doses from low-dose clinical challenges, the feasibility of statistical dosedistribution modeling has improved. Following on from this, other groups
in Europe (Crevel et al., 2014; Madsen et al., 2009) and Australia (Taylor
et al., 2014) also have recommended the use of statistical dose-distribution
modeling as the ideal approach to estimating population thresholds for
various allergenic foods.
The VITAL Program
The Allergen Bureau of Australia and New Zealand (an industry con­
sortium) has recommended establishing Reference Doses based on sta­
tistical dose-distribution modeling and the use of the Reference Doses
to support their VITAL® (Voluntary Incidental Trace Allergen Labeling)
program. VITAL is a voluntary program aimed at the food industry that
aims to provide a scientific basis for precautionary labeling decisions. The
Allergen Bureau has established an entire risk management program using
these Reference Doses as the basis.14
The Allergen Bureau of Australia and New Zealand established an
14 The VITAL program can be found at http://allergenbureau.net/vital (accessed July 8,
2016).

308

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

expert panel to examine existing individual threshold dose distributions
and apply statistical modeling approaches (log-normal, log-logistic, and
Weibull) to those distributions. The expert panel recommended using ED1
estimates for peanut, milk, egg, and hazelnut because sufficient data (from
>200 individuals) were available. The panel selected the 95 percent lower
CI of the ED5 for other foods when data from fewer individuals were avail­
able (Taylor et al., 2014). Subsequently, the Task Force on Thresholds to
Action Levels of the ILSI-EU endorsed the same EDp levels and the same
Reference Doses (Crevel et al., 2014). The Reference Doses for 11 aller­
genic foods taken from priority lists in Australia and New Zealand and the
EU are provided in Table 7-2. Attempts were made to examine individual
threshold dose distributions for celery and fish as well, but the existing
data did not fit any of the probabilistic models. The Allergen Bureau did
establish a Reference Dose for fish but it was not established on the basis
of the existing clinical evidence. The EDp value used by the Allergen Bureau
is rather conservative by comparison to the approaches used to define
hypoallergenic infant formula (the ED10) and similar to EDp values used
for chemical toxicants. As subsequent data become available from low-dose
clinical food challenges and single-dose validation studies, the selection of
the optimal EDp value should be re-examined.
Although this risk assessment approach has achieved acknowledgement
from expert groups in the United States, European Union, and Australia
and New Zealand (Crevel et al., 2014; Taylor et al., 2014), its adoption by
governmental public health agencies remains unfulfilled as it has not been
incorporated into public health policy regulation.
Now that statistical dose-distribution modeling for the hazard char­
acterization step of the risk assessment process is available, it can be
integrated with exposure assessment inputs to make risk characterization
feasible. The first demonstrations of the use of this approach came from
the Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research (Kruizinga
et al., 2008; Spanjersberg et al., 2007, 2010). This approach was later
adopted and used by groups in France (Rimbaud et al., 2010), the United
States (Remington et al., 2013a,b), and Ireland (Robertson et al., 2013).
Improvements on the risk assessment approach for allergenic foods con­
tinue to be developed, together with the recognition that this approach
provides the best way to quantitatively assess the magnitude of the risk
of any given scenario to appropriate segments of the populationwith food
allergies.
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
The labeling of allergenic packaged foods is an important public health
measure assisting consumers with a food allergy to avoid potentially aller­

7

40

31

33

Soybean

Wheat

Cashew

Mustard

19

Fish

2

4

26

1

16

1

28

67

33

19

6

15

0

2

2

2

1

5

6

4

24

59

30

Left
Censoredc

Children and Adults

Children and Adults

Adults

Children and Adults

Children and Adults

Children and Adults

Children

Children and Adults

Children and Adults

Children and Adults

Children and Adults

Children and Adults

Children and Adults

Population

LCI ED05

LCI ED05

LCI ED05

LCI ED05

LCI ED05

Hazelnut

LCI ED05

LCI ED05

ED01

ED01

ED01

ED01

Basis of RD

0.1 mg
(provisional)

NR

10 mg

0.2 mg

4.0 mg

0.05 mg

0.1 mg

1.0 mg

1.0 mg

0.1 mg

0.03 mg

0.1 mg

0.2 mg

RD (mg total protein)

NOTE: ED = eliciting dose, LCI = lower conﬁdence interval, LOAEL = lowest-observed-adverse-effect level, mg =milligram, NOAEL = no-observedadverse-effect level, NR = no recommendation, RD = Reference Dose.
a The Allergen Bureau of Australia and New Zealand adopted the RD recommendations of the VITAL Scientiﬁc Expert Panel (Taylor et al., 2014)
except for cashew, ﬁsh, and celery. For cashew, due to lack of clinical data on adults, the RD dose was based on that of hazelnut. Fish had insuf­
ﬁcient clinical data and, therefore, an arbitrary RD was selected. Likewise, celery had insufﬁcient clinical data; however, celery is not included in
the food allergen priority list of Australia and New Zealand, and therefore, a recommendation for celery was not needed.
b Number of right-censored subjects (NOAEL = highest challenge dose; LOAEL set to inﬁnity).
c Number of left-censored subjects (NOAEL set at zero; LOAEL = lowest challenge dose).

48

39

Shrimp

Celery

24

80

Hazelnut

21

202

Egg

Lupin

206

Milk

Sesame

10

351

Peanut

132

750

Allergen

Right
Censoredb

N with
Objective
Symptoms

TABLE 7-2 Reference Doses Established by Allergen Bureau of Australia and New Zealanda

309

310

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

genic foods. The current precautionary labeling system for allergenic foods
is not effective in informing consumers about the risks from food allergens
in the food for various reasons.
First, although all proteins can be allergenic, it is critical for public
health authorities to select the list of major allergens to be included in food
packaging labels. Although a panel of experts recommended prevalence,
potency, and severity as criteria to select the major allergens (Houben et al.,
2016; van Bilsen et al., 2011), the 1999 CAC list, which forms the basis for
priority lists of allergens in different countries, was developed when data
on the prevalence, potency, and severity for most allergenic foods were
just beginning to emerge. Since then, various countries have added other
allergenic foods based on a variety of reasons, including their regional diets
and other criteria. Consequently, although the eight basic major allergenic
foods are common in the priority lists of all countries, the lists also have
substantial differences. The committee concludes that prevalence, severity,
and potency should be used as scientific criteria for addition of foods to the
U.S. priority list in the future. Methods for collecting data on prevalence
and severity are outlined in Chapter 3. The probabilistic modeling of indi­
vidual threshold dose-distributions is advocated as an approach to measure
allergenic potency. At the same time, the committee recognizes that such an
approach will be difficult in the case of novel foods due to the absence of
data to support the criteria, potency in particular.
Second, the PAL system for warning consumers about the presence
of low levels of allergens in food is not effective. Initially, preventive
approaches related to packaged foods centered on mandatory labeling
of intentionally added allergenic foods or ingredients. However, potential
risks associated with unintentional residues of allergenic foods also exist.
Manufacturing companies develop ACPs to minimize the possibility of
allergen residues in foods due to shared processing equipment or manu­
facturing facilities (i.e., cross-contact). However, low-level residues might
still be present. Few analytical surveys have been conducted to determine
the frequency of packaged foods containing undeclared allergens in the
marketplace, but the frequency of product recalls in the United States and
Canada suggests that foods with undeclared allergens are on the market in
both countries. Concerns about potential risks to consumers with a food
allergy due to shared processing equipment or facilities prompted the pack­
aged foods industry to use PAL statements. PAL statements are voluntary,
but regulatory authorities indicate that statements must be truthful and
not misleading. Because the food industry has no capability to conduct
allergen risk assessments to determine threshold doses and safe levels, the
food industry has clearly struggled to make prudent and effective use of
PAL. Therefore, PAL statements are applied to a wide range of products,
including products that likely pose little risk to consumers with a food

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

311

allergy. The use of PAL also is driven by the potential legal consequences
associated with manufacturing a packaged food that can provoke allergic
reactions, and the desire to avoid litigation is thus an additional motivator.
The result is a labeling system for unintentional allergen residues that bears
almost no relationship to actual risk. For the consumer, the degree of risk
posed by a particular food bearing a PAL is unknown. The implementation
of a complete avoidance diet poses burdensome restrictions on individuals
and adversely affects their quality of life (Soller et al., 2014). In addition,
evidence suggests that consumers with a food allergy attempt to apply a risk
matrix to the various forms of PAL statements and that they ignore PAL
in some situations (Hefle et al., 2007; Sheth et al., 2010). Meanwhile, the
limited analytical surveys indicate that packaged food products with PAL
statements often do not contain detectable food allergen residues (Crotty
and Taylor, 2010; Ford et al., 2010; Hefle et al., 2007; Remington et al.,
2013a, 2015; Robertson et al., 2013; Zurzolo et al., 2013). Many different
stakeholders are critical of the current usage of PAL on packaged foods and
agree that the lack of Reference Doses has contributed to the inconsistent
application of PAL by the food industry (DunnGalvin et al., 2015).
The ineffectiveness of PAL statements and the lack of consistency and
transparency in the implementation of voluntary PAL statements to protect
the consumer with food allergies call for public health authorities to use a
risk-based approach predicated upon risk assessment principles. Quantita­
tive risk assessments can be conducted to assess the level of risk to con­
sumers from exposure to residue levels of allergenic foods in specific food
products (Crevel et al., 2007; Remington et al., 2013a, 2015; Spanjersberg
et al., 2007). In this manner, the estimated level of risk to consumers with
a food allergy can be communicated to consumers through more consistent
application of PAL strategies. Public health authorities in various countries
could use the information on individual thresholds to reach consensus
about population thresholds for specific allergenic foods and, ideally, these
population thresholds would be used to guide regulatory and food industry
labeling practices with the goal to match labeling to risk in a more meaning­
ful way. Ultimately, knowledge of population and individual thresholds for
specific allergenic foods could be helpful to allergic individuals, their physi­
cians, the food industry, and governmental regulatory agencies in protecting
the health of these consumers.
The approach described in this chapter is not currently used except in
Australia and New Zealand. The Allergen Bureau of Australia and New
Zealand, formed voluntarily by the food industry in an attempt to curtail
the widespread use of PAL, has developed the VITAL program. VITAL
has established Reference Doses for allergenic foods based on clinical data
on the distribution of individual threshold doses for individuals with spe­

312

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

cific food allergies (Allen et al., 2014a; Taylor et al., 2014). In the VITAL
approach, the use of PAL in food packaging is based on risk.
Although the voluntary establishment of Reference Doses by orga­
nizations such as the Allergen Bureau is laudable and a sign of progress,
the endorsement of Reference Doses by public health authorities would
enhance the impact of such approaches. Moreover, while the VITAL pro­
gram has emerged as a noteworthy, benchmark approach, it will be impor­
tant to critically assess its overall effectiveness.
In closing, it is important to emphasize that the largest share of the
responsibility for the implementation of safe and effective avoidance diets
falls onto consumers with a food allergy or their caregivers. However,
individuals often lack much of the critical information that is needed (see
Chapters 6 and 8). As mentioned in those chapters, all relevant stakehold­
ers, including health care professionals, public health authorities, and food
allergy advocacy groups, should be trained to offer consistent, evidencebased advice on allergen risks and allergen avoidance diets. which should
also be consistent with regulations and food industry labeling practices.
Risk assessment based on the best available scientific and clinical evidence
offers the best approach to achieve the desired consensus.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The committee recommends that the Codex Alimentarius Commis­
sion and public health authorities in individual countries decide on
a periodic basis about which allergenic foods should be included
in their priority lists based on scientific and clinical evidence of
regional prevalence and severity of food allergies as well as allergen
potency.
For example, in the United States, some foods listed by the
FDA as tree nuts (i.e., beech nut, butternut, chestnut, chinqua­
pin, coconut, gingko nut, hickory nut, lichee nut, pili nut, shea
nut) could be removed from the current priority list based on the
paucity of data or low frequency of allergic reactions. In addition,
evidence of the allergy prevalence and reaction severity to sesame
seeds may warrant their inclusion on the priority allergen list in
the United States.
The committee recommends that the Food and Drug Administra­
tion makes its decisions about labeling exemptions for ingredients
derived from priority allergenic sources based on a quantitative risk
assessment framework.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

A quantitative risk assessment is based on knowledge of the
detectable level of protein, its presence in the ingredient, exposure
levels to the ingredient, and threshold dose-distributions for indi­
viduals allergic to the food.
The committee recommends that the food manufacturing industry,
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the U.S. Depart­
ment of Agriculture (USDA) work cooperatively to replace the
Precautionary Allergen Labeling system for low-level allergen con­
taminants with a new risk-based labeling approach, such as the
VITAL program used in Australia and New Zealand.
To meet this risk-based approach, the following three steps are
recommended:
1. The FDA and the USDA should establish Reference Doses
(thresholds) for allergenic foods, where possible. The com­
mittee concludes that at this time, sufficient data exist on
milk, egg, peanut, certain tree nuts (i.e., cashew, walnut,
hazelnut), wheat, soybean, fish, and crustacean shellfish
(shrimp) to establish Reference Doses. The FDA and the
USDA should review the Reference Doses periodically, with
particular attention to the remaining tree nuts for which
data to establish Reference Doses are not currently avail­
able (i.e., almond, Brazil nut, macadamia nut, and pine
nut).
2. Once Reference Doses are established, a food product
would carry an advisory label (e.g., “peanut may be pres­
ent”) only in situations when ingesting the product would
expose the individual to a level above the Reference Dose
for that allergen. The FDA should restrict the number of
allowable advisory labels to one phrase. Because this label­
ing is voluntary, the product should clearly inform the
consumer, through labeling as appropriate, as to whether
a risk-based approach (such as VITAL) has been followed
for each specific product. The FDA and the USDA should
educate health care providers and consumers about the
meaning of such a food allergy advisory statement.
3. The FDA and the USDA, together with the food industry
and the analytical testing industry, should develop and vali­
date detection methods and sampling plans for the various
food allergens for which Reference Doses are established. A
common unit of reporting also should be established, such

313

314

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

as parts per million of protein from the allergenic source,
so that comparisons can be made between methods and
between levels in the food and clinical threshold values.
RESEARCH NEEDS
Some allergenic foods have higher potency and cause more severe
reactions than do others. Likewise, evidence indicates that changes in pro­
teins during food processing can contribute to their allergenicity, but these
changes and their effects are not the same for all allergenic proteins. The
relationship between specific protein characteristics (e.g., structure, sensitiv­
ity to heat, and digestibility) and specific processing conditions and potency
needs to be elucidated so it can be considered when designing research stud­
ies and when prescribing prevention approaches for individuals.
In addition to age and geographical differences, circumstantial factors
might modify the severity of a food allergy reaction and the level of allergen
needed for a reaction in an individual. The effect of exercise on experienc­
ing a food allergy reaction has been reported and it is well recognized.
However, for other factors, such as alcohol or medication use, biological
cycles, psychological factors, stress, and concomitant allergen exposures,
anecdotes are the main source of information. Identifying the factors that
can modify the severity of allergic reactions and defining their influence on
whether an allergic reaction is experienced upon exposure to a food allergen
or in changing in the specific eliciting dose are key pieces of information
needed to provide advice to individual patients (see Chapters 6 and 7).
To fill gaps in knowledge in this area, studies should be conducted to
accomplish the following objectives:

•

•
•

Strengthen current knowledge about food allergen risk assessment
and management, including continued assessment of threshold
doses for individual allergens; single dose oral challenges for con­
firmation of threshold doses; the development, application, and
improvement of parametric dose-distribution modeling approaches
for allergen risk assessment; food consumption patterns of popula­
tions with food allergy; and methods to detect allergen residues in
food matrices.
Study the mechanisms that make some food proteins more aller­
genic than others and the effects of food processing methods and
other ingredients on their allergenicity and thresholds.
Study the possible effects of augmentation factors on threshold
doses (e.g., exercise, alcohol) or on modifying the severity of reac­
tions, and the mechanisms underlying such effects.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

315

REFERENCES
AAP (American Academy of Pediatrics). 2000. Hypoallergenic infant formulas. Pediatrics
106(2 Pt 1):346-349.
Akiyama, H., T. Imai, and M. Ebisawa. 2011. Japan food allergen labeling regulation—
History and evaluation. Adv Food Nutr Res 62:139-171.
Allen, K. J., B. C. Remington, J. L. Baumert, R. W. Crevel, G. F. Houben, S. Brooke-Taylor,
A. G. Kruizinga, and S. L. Taylor. 2014a. Allergen reference doses for precautionary
labeling (VITAL 2.0): Clinical implications. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(1):156-164.
Allen, K. J., P. J. Turner, R. Pawankar, S. Taylor, S. Sicherer, G. Lack, N. Rosario, M. Ebisawa,
G. Wong, E. N. Mills, K. Beyer, A. Fiocchi, and H. A. Sampson. 2014b. Precautionary
labelling of foods for allergen content: Are we ready for a global framework? World
Allergy Organ J 7(1):10.
Ballmer-Weber, B. K., M. Fernandez-Rivas, K. Beyer, M. Defernez, M. Sperrin, A. R. Mackie,
L. J. Salt, J. O. Hourihane, R. Asero, S. Belohlavkova, M. Kowalski, F. de Blay, N. G.
Papadopoulos, M. Clausen, A. C. Knulst, G. Roberts, T. Popov, A. B. Sprikkelman,
R. Dubakiene, S. Vieths, R. van Ree, R. Crevel, and E. N. Mills. 2015. How much is
too much? Threshold dose distributions for 5 food allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol
135(4):964-971.
Bindslev-Jensen, C., D. Briggs, and M. Osterballe. 2002. Can we determine a threshold level
for allergenic foods by statistical analysis of published data in the literature? Allergy
57(8):741-746.
Bjorksten, B., R. Crevel, C. Hischenhuber, M. Lovik, F. Samuels, S. Strobel, S. L. Taylor,
J. M. Wal, and R. Ward. 2008. Criteria for identifying allergenic foods of public health
importance. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 51(1):42-52.
Blom, W. M., B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, A. G. Kruizinga, S. van der Heide, G. F. Houben, and A. E.
Dubois. 2013. Threshold dose distributions for 5 major allergenic foods in children. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 131(1):172-179.
Blumchen, K., A. Beder, J. Beschorner, F. Ahrens, A. Gruebl, E. Hamelmann, G. Hansen, A.
Heinzmann, K. Nemat, B. Niggemann, U. Wahn, and K. Beyer. 2014. Modified oral food
challenge used with sensitization biomarkers provides more real-life clinical thresholds
for peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 134(2):390-398.
Bock, S. A., A. Munoz-Furlong, and H. A. Sampson. 2007. Further fatalities caused by
anaphylactic reactions to food, 2001-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 119(4):1016-1018.
Bousquet, J., B. Bjorksten, C. A. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, A. Huggett, C. Ortolani, J. O. Warner,
and M. Smith. 1998. Scientific criteria and the selection of allergenic foods for product
labelling. Allergy 53(47 Suppl):3-21.
Boyce, J. A., A. Assa’ad, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, H. A. Sampson, R. A. Wood, M. Plaut,
S. F. Cooper, M. J. Fenton, S. H. Arshad, S. L. Bahna, L. A. Beck, C. Byrd-Bredbenner,
C. A. Camargo, Jr., L. Eichenfield, G. T. Furuta, J. M. Hanifin, C. Jones, M. Kraft, B. D.
Levy, P. Lieberman, S. Luccioli, K. M. McCall, L. C. Schneider, R. A. Simon, F. E. Simons,
S. J. Teach, B. P. Yawn, and J. M. Schwaninger. 2010. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: Summary of the NIAID-Sponsored
Expert Panel Report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(6):1105-1118.
Buchanan, A. D., T. D. Green, S. M. Jones, A. M. Scurlock, L. Christie, K. A. Althage, P. H.
Steele, L. Pons, R. M. Helm, L. A. Lee, and A. W. Burks. 2007. Egg oral immunotherapy
in nonanaphylactic children with egg allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 119(1):199-205.
Clark, A. T., S. Islam, Y. King, J. Deighton, K. Anagnostou, and P. W. Ewan. 2009. Successful
oral tolerance induction in severe peanut allergy. Allergy 64(8):1218-1220.

316

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Crevel, R. W., D. Briggs, S. L. Hefle, A. C. Knulst, and S. L. Taylor. 2007. Hazard characteri­
sation in food allergen risk assessment: The application of statistical approaches and the
use of clinical data. Food Chem Toxicol 45(5):691-701.
Crevel, R., D. A. Moneret-Vautrin, M. Morisset, D. Sheffield, S. L. Taylor, and J. L. Baumert.
2010. A preliminary analysis of the evolution of peanut thresholds over repeated chal­
lenges in a population of consecutive clinic patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 125(2):AB84.
Crevel, R. W., J. L. Baumert, A. Baka, G. F. Houben, A. C. Knulst, A. G. Kruizinga, S. Luccioli,
S. L. Taylor, and C. B. Madsen. 2014. Development and evolution of risk assessment for
food allergens. Food Chem Toxicol 67:262-276.
Crotty, M. P., and S. L. Taylor. 2010. Risks associated with foods having advisory milk label­
ing. J Allergy Clin Immunol 125(4):935-937.
Dano, D., B. C. Remington, C. Astier, J. L. Baumert, A. G. Kruizinga, B. E. Bihain, S. L.
Taylor, and G. Kanny. 2015. Sesame allergy threshold dose distribution. Food Chem
Toxicol 83:48-53.
de Silva, D., M. Geromi, S. S. Panesar, A. Muraro, T. Werfel, K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber,
G. Roberts, V. Cardona, A. E. Dubois, S. Halken, A. Host, L. K. Poulsen, R. Van Ree,
B. J. Vlieg-Boerstra, I. Agache, and A. Sheikh. 2014. Acute and long-term management
of food allergy: Systematic review. Allergy 69(2):159-167.
Deibel, K., T. Trautman, T. DeBoom, W. H. Sveum, G. Dunaif, V. N. Scott, and D. T. Bernard.
1997. A comprehensive approach to reducing the risk of allergens in foods. J Food Pro­
tection 60(4):436-441.
Derr, L. E. 2006. When food is poison: The history, consequences, and limitations of the
Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of 2004. Food Drug Law J
61(1):65-165.
DunnGalvin, A., C. H. Chan, R. Crevel, K. Grimshaw, R. Poms, S. Schnadt, S. L. Taylor,
P. Turner, K. J. Allen, M. Austin, A. Baka, J. L. Baumert, S. Baumgartner, K. Beyer, L.
Bucchini, M. Fernandez-Rivas, K. Grinter, G. F. Houben, J. Hourihane, F. Kenna, A. G.
Kruizinga, G. Lack, C. B. Madsen, E. N. Clare Mills, N. G. Papadopoulos, A. Alldrick, L.
Regent, R. Sherlock, J. M. Wal, and G. Roberts. 2015. Precautionary allergen labelling:
Perspectives from key stakeholder groups. Allergy 70(9):1039-1051.
Ebisawa, M. M. M. 2003. Food allergy in Japan. Allergy Clin Immunol Int 15(5):214-217.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). 2005. Opinion of the Scientific Panel on Dietetic
Products, Nutrition and Allergies [NDA] related to the evaluation of lupin for labelling
purposes. EFSA Journal 302:1-11.
EFSA. 2006. Opinion of the Scientific Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Aller­
gies (NDA) related to the evaluation of molluscs for labelling purposes. EFSA Journal
327:1-25.
Eller, E., T. K. Hansen, and C. Bindslev-Jensen. 2012. Clinical thresholds to egg, hazelnut,
milk and peanut: Results from a single-center study using standardized challenges. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol 108(5):332-336.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand. 2015. Changes proposed to mandatory allergen labelling requirements. http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/media/Pages/Changes-proposed-to­
mandatory-allergen-labelling-requirements.aspx (accessed July 5, 2016).
Ford, L. S., S. L. Taylor, R. Pacenza, L. M. Niemann, D. M. Lambrecht, and S. H. Sicherer.
2010. Food allergen advisory labeling and product contamination with egg, milk, and
peanut. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(2):384-385.
Gendel, S. M. 2012. Comparison of international food allergen labeling regulations. Regul
Toxicol Pharmacol 63(2):279-285.
Gendel, S. M. 2014. Learning from FDA food allergen recalls and reportable foods. Food
Safety Magazine April/May:46-48, 50, 52, 80.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

317

Gendel, S., R. Buchanan, S. Dennis, D. Acheson, S. A. Assimon, N. Beru, P. Bolger, D. Carlson,
R. Carvajal, C. Copp, K. Falci, E. Garber, E. Harden, R. Kane, J. Kvenberg, S. Luccioli,
D. Park, R. Raybourne, T. Troxell, and K. Vierk. 2008. Approaches to establish thresh­
olds for major food allergens and for gluten in food. J Food Protection 71(5):1043-1088.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, M. R. Warrier, B. Smith, R. Kumar, J. Pongracic, and J. L. Holl.
2011. The prevalence, severity, and distribution of childhood food allergy in the United
States. Pediatrics 128(1):e9-e17.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, B. Smith, J. Pongracic, J. L. Holl, and M. R. Warrier. 2013.
Parent report of physician diagnosis in pediatric food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
131(1):150-156.
Hansen, T. K., L. K. Poulsen, P. Stahl Skov, S. L. Hefle, J. J. Hlywka, S. L. Taylor, U. BindslevJensen, and C. Bindslev-Jensen. 2004. A randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled
oral challenge study to evaluate the allergenicity of commercial, food-grade fish gelatin.
Food Chem Toxicol 42(12):2037-2044.
Hefle, S. L., T. J. Furlong, L. Niemann, H. Lemon-Mule, S. Sicherer, and S. L. Taylor. 2007.
Consumer attitudes and risks associated with packaged foods having advisory labeling
regarding the presence of peanuts. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(1):171-176.
Houben, G., P. Burney, C. H. Chan, R. Crevel, A. Dubois, R. Faludi, R. Klein Entink, A.
Knulst, S. Taylor, and S. Ronsmans. 2016. Prioritisation of allergenic foods with respect
to public health relevance: Report from an ILSI Europe Food Allergy Task Force Expert
Group. Food Chem Toxicol 89:8-18.
Hourihane, J. O., S. A. Kilburn, J. A. Nordlee, S. L. Hefle, S. L. Taylor, and J. O. Warner.
1997a. An evaluation of the sensitivity of subjects with peanut allergy to very low doses
of peanut protein: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge study.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 100(5):596-600.
Hourihane, J. O., S. J. Bedwani, T. P. Dean, and J. O. Warner. 1997b. Randomised, double
blind, crossover challenge study of allergenicity of peanut oils in subjects allergic to
peanuts. BMJ 314(7087):1084-1088.
Hourihane, J. O., K. J. Allen, W. G. Shreffler, G. DunnGalvin, J. Baumert, G. Zurzolo, L.
Gurrin, A. DunnGalvin, J. Nordlee, and S. Taylor. In press. Peanut Allergen Threshold
Study (PATS): Validation of eliciting doses using a novel, single-dose challenge protocol.
Allergy.
IOM and NRC (Institute of Medicine and National Research Council). 2015. A framework
for assessing effects of the food system. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IPCS (International Programme on Chemical Safety). 2004. IPCS risk assessment terminology.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
Jones, S. M., L. Pons, J. L. Roberts, A. M. Scurlock, T. T. Perry, M. Kulis, W. G. Shreffler, P.
Steele, K. A. Henry, M. Adair, J. M. Francis, S. Durham, B. P. Vickery, X. Zhong, and
A. W. Burks. 2009. Clinical efficacy and immune regulation with peanut oral immuno­
therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 124(2):292-300.
Keet, C. A., E. C. Matsui, G. Dhillon, P. Lenehan, M. Paterakis, and R. A. Wood. 2009. The
natural history of wheat allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 102(5):410-415.
Kimber, I., S. Stone, and R. J. Dearman. 2003. Assessment of the inherent allergenic potential
of proteins in mice. Environ Health Perspect 111(2):227-231.
Klein Entink, R. H., B. C. Remington, W. M. Blom, C. M. Rubingh, A. G. Kruizinga, J. L.
Baumert, S. L. Taylor, and G. F. Houben. 2014. Food allergy population thresholds: An
evaluation of the number of oral food challenges and dosing schemes on the accuracy of
threshold dose distribution modeling. Food Chem Toxicol 70:134-143.

318

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Koppelman, S. J., J. A. Nordlee, P. W. Lee, R. P. Happe, M. Hessing, R. Norland, T. Manning,
R. Deschene, G. A. De Jong, and S. L. Taylor. 2012. Parvalbumin in fish skin-derived
gelatin: Is there a risk for fish allergic consumers? Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal
Control Expo Risk Assess 29(9):1347-1355.
Kruizinga, A. G., D. Briggs, R. W. Crevel, A. C. Knulst, L. M. van den Bosch, and G. F.
Houben. 2008. Probabilistic risk assessment model for allergens in food: Sensitivity
analysis of the minimum eliciting dose and food consumption. Food Chem Toxicol
46(5):1437-1443.
Lucas, C. D., J. B. Hallagan, and S. L. Taylor. 2001. The role of natural color additives in food
allergy. Adv Food Nutr Res 43:195-216.
Madsen, C. B., S. Hattersley, J. Buck, S. M. Gendel, G. F. Houben, J. O. Hourihane, A.
Mackie, E. N. Mills, P. Norhede, S. L. Taylor, and R. W. Crevel. 2009. Approaches to
risk assessment in food allergy: Report from a workshop “developing a framework for
assessing the risk from allergenic foods.” Food Chem Toxicol 47(2):480-489.
NRC (National Research Council). 1980. Risk assessment/safety evaluation of food chemicals.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Nwaru, B. I., L. Hickstein, S. S. Panesar, G. Roberts, A. Muraro, and A. Sheikh. 2014.
Prevalence of common food allergies in Europe: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Allergy 69(8):992-1007.
Pele, M., M. Brohee, E. Anklam, and A. J. Van Hengel. 2007. Peanut and hazelnut traces in
cookies and chocolates: Relationship between analytical results and declaration of food
allergens on product labels. Food Addit Contam 24(12):1334-1344.
Perry, T. T., E. C. Matsui, M. K. Conover-Walker, and R. A. Wood. 2004. Risk of oral food
challenges. J Allergy Clin Immunol 114(5):1164-1168.
Pieretti, M. M., D. Chung, R. Pacenza, T. Slotkin, and S. H. Sicherer. 2009. Audit of manufac­
tured products: Use of allergen advisory labels and identification of labeling ambiguities.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 124(2):337-341.
Remington, B. C., J. L. Baumert, D. B. Marx, and S. L. Taylor. 2013a. Quantitative risk as­
sessment of foods containing peanut advisory labeling. Food Chem Toxicol 62:179-187.
Remington, B. C., S. L. Taylor, D. B. Marx, B. J. Petersen, and J. L. Baumert. 2013b. Soy
in wheat—Contamination levels and food allergy risk assessment. Food Chem Toxicol
62:485-491.
Remington, B. C., J. L. Baumert, W. M. Blom, G. F. Houben, S. L. Taylor, and A. G. Kruizinga.
2015. Unintended allergens in precautionary labelled and unlabelled products pose sig­
nificant risks to UK allergic consumers. Allergy 70(7):813-819.
Rimbaud, L., F. Heraud, S. La Vieille, J. C. Leblanc, and A. Crepet. 2010. Quantitative risk
assessment relating to adventitious presence of allergens in food: A probabilistic model
applied to peanut in chocolate. Risk Anal 30(1):7-19.
Robertson, O. N., J. O. Hourihane, B. C. Remington, J. L. Baumert, and S. L. Taylor.
2013. Survey of peanut levels in selected Irish food products bearing peanut allergen
advisory labels. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk Assess
30(9):1467-1472.
Rolinck-Werninghaus, C., B. Niggemann, L. Grabenhenrich, U. Wahn, and K. Beyer. 2012.
Outcome of oral food challenges in children in relation to symptom-eliciting allergen dose
and allergen-specific IgE. Allergy 67(7):951-957.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

319

Sampson, H. A., S. Aceves, S. A. Bock, J. James, S. Jones, D. Lang, K. Nadeau, A. NowakWegrzyn, J. Oppenheimer, T. T. Perry, C. Randolph, S. H. Sicherer, R. A. Simon, B. P.
Vickery, R. Wood, Joint Task Force on Practice Partnership, D. Bernstein, J. BlessingMoore, D. Khan, D. Lang, R. Nicklas, J. Oppenheimer, J. Portnoy, C. Randolph, D.
Schuller, S. Spector, S. A. Tilles, D. Wallace, Practice Parameter Workshop, H. A. Samp­
son, S. Aceves, S. A. Bock, J. James, S. Jones, D. Lang, K. Nadeau, A. Nowak-Wegrzyn,
J. Oppenheimer, T. T. Perry, C. Randolph, S. H. Sicherer, R. A. Simon, B. P. Vickery,
and R. Wood. 2014. Food allergy: A practice parameter update—2014. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 134(5):1016-1025.
Savage, J. H., E. C. Matsui, J. M. Skripak, and R. A. Wood. 2007. The natural history of egg
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(6):1413-1417.
Savage, J. H., A. J. Kaeding, E. C. Matsui, and R. A. Wood. 2010. The natural history of soy
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 125(3):683-686.
Sheth, S. S., S. Waserman, R. Kagan, R. Alizadehfar, M. N. Primeau, S. Elliot, Y. St Pierre, R.
Wickett, L. Joseph, L. Harada, C. Dufresne, M. Allen, M. Allen, S. B. Godefroy, and A.
E. Clarke. 2010. Role of food labels in accidental exposures in food-allergic individuals
in Canada. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 104(1):60-65.
Sicherer, S. H., E. H. Morrow, and H. A. Sampson. 2000. Dose-response in double-blind,
placebo-controlled oral food challenges in children with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 105(3):582-586.
Skolnick, H. S., M. K. Conover-Walker, C. B. Koerner, H. A. Sampson, W. Burks, and
R. A. Wood. 2001. The natural history of peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
107(2):367-374.
Skripak, J. M., E. C. Matsui, K. Mudd, and R. A. Wood. 2007. The natural history of IgE­
mediated cow’s milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(5):1172-1177.
Skripak, J. M., S. D. Nash, H. Rowley, N. H. Brereton, S. Oh, R. G. Hamilton, E. C. Matsui,
A. W. Burks, and R. A. Wood. 2008. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study of milk oral immunotherapy for cow’s milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
122(6):1154-1160.
Soller, L., J. Hourihane, and A. DunnGalvin. 2014. The impact of oral food challenge tests on
food allergy health-related quality of life. Allergy 69(9):1255-1257.
Spanjersberg, M. Q., A. G. Kruizinga, M. A. Rennen, and G. F. Houben. 2007. Risk assess­
ment and food allergy: The probabilistic model applied to allergens. Food Chem Toxicol
45(1):49-54.
Spanjersberg, M. Q., A. C. Knulst, A. G. Kruizinga, G. Van Duijn, and G. F. Houben. 2010.
Concentrations of undeclared allergens in food products can reach levels that are relevant
for public health. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk Assess
27(2):169-174.
Taylor, S. L., and J. L. Baumert. 2010. Cross-contamination of foods and implications for food
allergic patients. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 10(4):265-270.
Taylor, S. L., and J. L. Baumert. 2015. Worldwide food allergy labeling and detection of al­
lergens in processed foods. Chem Immunol Allergy 101:227-234.
Taylor, S. L., and E. S. Dormedy. 1998. The role of flavoring substances in food allergy and
intolerance. Adv Food Nutr Res 42:1-44.
Taylor, S. L., and S. L. Hefle. 2000. Hidden triggers of adverse reactions to foods. Can J Al­
lergy Clin Immunol 5(3):106-110.
Taylor, S. L., S. L. Hefle, C. Bindslev-Jensen, S. A. Bock, A. W. Burks, Jr., L. Christie, D. J.
Hill, A. Host, J. O. Hourihane, G. Lack, D. D. Metcalfe, D. A. Moneret-Vautrin, P. A.
Vadas, F. Rance, D. J. Skrypec, T. A. Trautman, I. M. Yman, and R. S. Zeiger. 2002.
Factors affecting the determination of threshold doses for allergenic foods: How much
is too much? J Allergy Clin Immunol 109(1):24-30.

320

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Taylor, S. L., S. L. Hefle, K. Farnum, S. W. Rizk, J. Yeung, M. E. Barnett, F. Busta, F. R.
Shank, R. Newsome, S. Davis, and C. M. Bryant. 2006. Analysis and evaluation of food
manufacturing practices used to address allergen concerns. Comprehensive Reviews in
Food Science and Food Safety 5(4):138-157.
Taylor, S. L., R. W. Crevel, D. Sheffield, J. Kabourek, and J. Baumert. 2009. Threshold dose
for peanut: Risk characterization based upon published results from challenges of peanutallergic individuals. Food Chem Toxicol 47(6):1198-1204.
Taylor, S. L., D. A. Moneret-Vautrin, R. W. Crevel, D. Sheffield, M. Morisset, P. Dumont, B. C.
Remington, and J. L. Baumert. 2010. Threshold dose for peanut: Risk characterization
based upon diagnostic oral challenge of a series of 286 peanut-allergic individuals. Food
Chem Toxicol 48(3):814-819.
Taylor, S. L., J. L. Baumert, A. G. Kruizinga, B. C. Remington, R. W. Crevel, S. Brooke-Taylor,
K. J. Allen, Allergen Bureau of Australia and New Zealand, and G. Houben. 2014.
Establishment of Reference Doses for residues of allergenic foods: Report of the VITAL
Expert Panel. Food Chem Toxicol 63:9-17.
Turner, P. J., J. L. Baumert, K. Beyer, R. J. Boyle, C. H. Chan, A. T. Clark, R. W. Crevel, A.
DunnGalvin, M. Fernandez-Rivas, M. H. Gowland, L. Grabenhenrich, S. Hardy, G. F.
Houben, J. O’B HourihaneJ, A. Muraro, L. K. Poulsen, K. Pyrz, B. C. Remington, S.
Schnadt, R. van Ree, C. Venter, M. Worm, E. N. Mills, G. Roberts, and B. K. BallmerWeber. 2016. Can we identify patients at risk of life-threatening allergic reactions to
food? Allergy 71(9):1241-1255.
van Bilsen, J. H., S. Ronsmans, R. W. Crevel, R. J. Rona, H. Przyrembel, A. H. Penninks, L.
Contor, and G. F. Houben. 2011. Evaluation of scientific criteria for identifying allergenic
foods of public health importance. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 60(3):281-289.
Vierk, K., K. Falci, C. Wolyniak, and K. C. Klontz. 2002. Recalls of foods containing unde­
clared allergens reported to the US Food and Drug Administration, fiscal year 1999. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 109(6):1022-1026.
Weber, P., H. Steinhart, and A. Paschke. 2009. Competitive indirect ELISA for the determina­
tion of parvalbumins from various fish species in food grade fish gelatins and isinglass
with PARV-19 anti-parvalbumin antibodies. J Agric Food Chem 57(23):11328-11334.
Zarkadas, M., F. W. Scott, J. Salminen, and A. H. Pong. 1999. Common allergenic foods and
their labelling in Canada—A review. Can J Allergy Clin Immunol 4(3):118-141.
Zhu, J., R. Pouillot, E. K. Kwegyir-Afful, S. Luccioli, and S. M. Gendel. 2015. A retrospective
analysis of allergic reaction severities and minimal eliciting doses for peanut, milk, egg,
and soy oral food challenges. Food Chem Toxicol 80:92-100.
Zurzolo, G. A., J. J. Koplin, M. L. Mathai, S. L. Taylor, D. Tey, and K. J. Allen. 2013. Foods
with precautionary allergen labeling in Australia rarely contain detectable allergen. J
Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(4):401-403.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

321

ANNEX 7: DATA INPUTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
Oral Food Challenges as Inputs to Determine
Thresholds in Risk Assessment
General Protocol Considerations
For the purposes of hazard characterization, individuals with a food
allergy should be challenged orally with the food over a range of incre­
mental doses to determine the minimal dose needed to elicit an allergic
reaction. These oral food challenges (OFCs) are most often conducted in
controlled clinical settings. Consensus clinical protocols exist for such test­
ing (Bindslev-Jensen et al., 2004; Taylor et al., 2004), including avoidance
of certain medications before and during challenges, time intervals between
doses, use of placebo-controlled crossover designs, use of objective symp­
toms (or abdominal pain in infants and young children) as the criteria for
stopping challenges, and a fasting period before challenges. There are vari­
ous types of OFC depending on the protocol.15 Ideally, the design would
be a double-blind, placebo-control test with doses ranging wide enough to
ensure reactions at some dose. Thus, the initial doses should be sufficiently
low (low milligram [mg] or even sub-milligram levels) to ensure that very
few individuals react at the initial dose (Cochrane et al., 2012). Many varia­
tions on that general protocol, such as dosage schemes, have been used by
different investigators.
Dosing schemes The dosing schemes used in clinical OFC protocols vary,
and the Interval-Censoring Survival Analysis approach has been used to
adjust for the different dosing schemes. However, it is important to note
that the outcomes of the probabilistic modeling can be influenced if a large
proportion of the data are not interval-censored (e.g., first dose or leftcensored reactors) (Taylor et al., 2009). Recently, concerns have been raised
about the time interval between doses, generally 20 or 30 minutes, being
too short (Blumchen et al., 2014). Clearly, an entire dose is unlikely to be
fully assimilated (digested, absorbed, and presented to the immune system)
in 20 to 30 minutes. However, by recording both the discrete and cumula­
tive doses that provoke the first objective signs and comparing these two
doses in the probabilistic modeling, this concern is abated due to the small
15 There are three types of oral food challenges (OFCs) depending on the protocol. An
open OFC is one where the food is in its natural form; a single-blind OFC is one where the
food is masked from the patient’s perspective so less patient bias occurs because of anxiety; a
double-blind, placebo-controlled OFC involves masking the tested allergen and feeding it or
indistinguishable placebo randomly without the patient or observer knowing if the allergen
or placebo is being tested.

322

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

BOX 7A-1
Host-Associated Factors That Might Affect Allergic Reactivity
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Genetic predisposition (including gender, ethnicity)
Circadian, menstrual, and other biological cycles (including age)
Psychological factors (including stress)
Environmental factors
Concomitant or cumulative allergen exposures (priming)
Activity (including exercise)
Infections
Alcohol usage
Medication status
Coexisting disease (e.g., asthma, diabetes, cardiovascular disease)
Individual day-to-day variability

differences that occur at the lowest doses. In fact, the estimated population
threshold for peanut obtained by Blumchen et al. (2014) was in agreement
with earlier estimates based on shorter time intervals between doses (Taylor
et al., 2010, 2014).
In addition to the dosing scheme, other variables in the clinical OFC
protocol, such as the nature of the challenge materials and the matrix for
blinding of challenges, also should be considered (Crevel et al., 2014). The
nature of the material is important because the potency of the allergen may
vary depending on the source or processing. The matrix also is a consider­
ation because the allergen may be released more slowly from some matrices
as opposed to others.
Identifying objective versus subjective reactions By definition, to determine
an individual’s threshold, the level of allergen that provokes a response
needs to be measured. Clinicians and others need to reach consensus about
what constitutes an allergic response (see Box A7-1). In some studies,
subjective responses over three successive, increasing doses is considered a
reaction (Ballmer-Weber et al., 2015; Flinterman et al., 2006). However, a
new consensus has emerged that only objective responses should serve as
the basis for identifying an individual’s threshold in an OFC (Crevel et al.,
2014).16 In clinical settings, objective symptoms can be confirmed to occur
and their reproducibility readily assessed (Taylor et al., 2014).

16 One exception is for abdominal pain in infants and children younger than the age of 3
years, which is accepted as a response.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

323

Nature of the challenge material and matrix Various forms of the allergenic
food can be used in OFC trials. For example, peanut could be in the form
of crushed peanuts, peanut butter, or peanut flour. These forms of peanut
vary in their protein and allergen content (e.g., peanuts are approximately
25 percent protein while peanut flour is approximately 50 percent pro­
tein). Thus, the challenge material doses can be normalized on the basis of
protein content (Taylor et al., 2014), an appropriate approach considering
that food allergens are proteins. In general, all forms of the allergenic food
are assumed to have equivalent allergenicity at any given dose of protein
although this is not true when comparing different fractions of a food (e.g.,
egg white and whole egg). Of course, processing of the food could have
an effect on allergenicity. In fact, clinical studies have documented that
many milk- and egg-allergic patients become tolerant of baked milk or egg
before they develop a tolerance for these foods in forms that are subjected
to lesser degrees of heat processing, and this is reflected in increased indi­
vidual thresholds (Lemon-Mule et al., 2008; Nowak-Wegrzyn et al., 2008).
For some allergenic foods, such as milk and egg, challenges should ideally
use less processed forms of food, such as pasteurized, spray-dried or even
raw, where possible in order to ensure an elicitation will occur at the low­
est possible dose (Crevel et al., 2014; Taylor et al., 2014). However, for
foods such as peanut, where the allergens are more heat-stable, the use of
typical heat-processed forms of the food, such as roasted peanuts or peanut
butter, is less likely to influence estimated lowest-observed-adverse-effect
levels (LOAELs) and no-observed-adverse-effect levels (NOAELs) (Crevel
et al., 2014). The individual threshold data used in probabilistic modelling
have been obtained from mildly processed forms for many of the foods,
as the challenge materials are pasteurized and/or spray-dried at most. The
outcome of challenges also may depend upon the matrix or vehicle used
for the OFCs, such as the level of fat (e.g., chocolate versus other vehicles)
(Cochrane et al., 2012; Grimshaw et al., 2003; Mackie et al., 2012). This
factor has not been thoroughly investigated but, to date, OFCs are gener­
ally administered in readily digestible matrices that mimic the food in which
they would actually be eaten.
Biases
Population biases One obvious limitation for developing a dose distribution
of individual minimal eliciting doses (EDs) for any population with a food
allergy is the prevalence of that specific food allergy. This is because of
the need to assemble a sufficient number of individuals to have a robust
dose-distribution relationship. Besides that, challenge testing of individuals
with a food allergy has revealed a wide variation of individual minimal
EDs, ranging from 0.4 mg up to 10 g of whole peanut (Taylor et al., 2009,

324

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

2010). Thus, to develop a dose-distribution of individual minimal EDs for
any population with a food allergy, individuals must be selected who are
representative of the entire population of individuals allergic to the par­
ticular food in question. In this respect, the possibility of patient selection
biases is one of the chief concerns. Dose–response data for statistical model­
ing to estimate population thresholds can be obtained from three types of
published (and unpublished) studies: diagnostic series, threshold studies,
and immunotherapy trials (Taylor et al., 2009). The possibility of patient
selection biases in such studies is demonstrated by the existence of different
ED517 estimates for peanut for patients from these three types of studies
(Taylor et al., 2009). Individuals enrolled in diagnostic trials should ide­
ally include all patients who are seeking confirmation of a particular food
allergy. However, in some clinics, patients with histories of severe allergic
reactions are excluded from OFCs. In addition, diagnostic series do not
always start at low doses, as the recommended initial dose for diagnostic
OFCs is 500 mg (Bock et al., 1988). When the first dosage interval between
0 and the first dose is large, these data are difficult to include in the model
because of the effect of the interval width. Thus, data from diagnostic series
should be sought from OFCs that start at rather low doses (low mg or less).
An Australian study illustrated the effect of the choice of the dosing scheme
on the ED estimate. In this study of milk, the first dose ranged from 66 to
300 mg (Allen et al., 2014). The ED05 for the Australian patients was 69.5
mg milk protein compared to 1.9 and 2.0 mg for the Netherlands and Italy,
respectively. This difference was attributed to the dosing scheme (Allen et
al., 2014).
In threshold studies, the intent is to determine the threshold doses for
a group of patients with a specific food allergy. A clinical patient selection
bias could occur due to efforts to include highly sensitive patients as docu­
mented by their patient history. The ED estimates for threshold studies tend
to be lower than for diagnostic series, which may confirm the existence of
patient selection bias toward the more highly sensitive (Allen et al., 2014;
Taylor et al., 2009).
In immunotherapy trials, the goal is to desensitize patients with a
specific food allergy by administering low, steadily increasing, doses of
the allergenic food over time (see Chapter 6). The placebo arm of the
immunotherapy trial is an oral, low-dose challenge that establishes the
minimal ED, which then dictates the choice of the initial immunotherapy
doses. This initial OFC provides the patient’s individual threshold dose. A
patient selection bias might occur in such studies, as the selection of highly
17 The subscript represents the percentage of the allergic population in whom the dose of
total protein from the allergenic food is predicted to produce an objective response. In this
case the predicted percentage is 5 percent.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

325

sensitive patients establishes a more rigorous test of the effectiveness of
immunotherapy. In several instances, the ED estimates for immunotherapy
patient populations is lower than for diagnostic series (Allen et al., 2014),
indicating a possible selection bias toward more highly sensitive individu­
als. However, in a study of anti-immunoglobulin E (IgE) immunotherapy, a
comparison revealed that patient selection in that study was biased toward
less sensitive subjects (Taylor et al., 2009). By including patients from all
three types of studies in the statistical modeling, the effects of patient selec­
tion bias are muted to some degree (Allen et al., 2014; Taylor et al., 2009).
The possible under-representation of patients with histories of severe
reactions in datasets used for probabilistic modeling has been an expressed
concern because patients with histories of severe allergic reactions are
excluded from OFCs in some clinics (Luccioli and Kwegyir-Afful, 2014).
However, in one large diagnostic series study of patients with peanut allergy
where all patients were enrolled in OFCs regardless of a history of severe
reactions, no differences were found in the estimated ED05 between patients
with histories of severe reactions and patients who had histories of mild
or moderate reactions (Taylor et al., 2010). Additionally, these patients are
not always excluded from oral immunotherapy trials, which represent one
of the largest sources of data for this probabilistic modeling.
Uncertainty Factors
The data supporting the establishment of population thresholds are
robust because they are derived from controlled OFCs in individuals who
have reacted at low doses of the allergenic food. However, several uncer­
tainties should be recognized.
Geographic and age differences Much of the low-dose challenge data ema­
nate from Europe, so concerns have been raised regarding the possibility
of geographic differences in population thresholds. Geographic differences
in ED estimates have been noted for milk and peanut (Allen et al., 2014).
However, the differences for peanut ED estimates may be attributable to
patient selection biases because most data are from immunotherapy studies
in the United Kingdom. Additionally, the differences for milk ED estimates
are mostly likely attributable to the choice of dose progression scheme in
Australia, as described above (Allen et al., 2014). The possibility of age dif­
ferences also has been investigated for peanut and hazelnut, without much
difference in EDp estimates (Allen et al., 2014). However, clearly for milk,
egg, and several other foods, many infants and young children do outgrow
their food allergy and become fully tolerant (Keet et al., 2009; Savage et
al., 2010; Sicherer et al., 2014; Wood et al., 2013), which implies that their

326

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

individual thresholds increase over time, although this assumption has
never been completely tested.
Validation of statistical models and ED estimates The use of a single dose
oral challenge at a particular, predicted EDp, (e.g., ED05), could be used to
validate the probabilistic model estimates of population thresholds (Zurzolo
et al., 2013). A single dose peanut trial at the ED05 has recently been com­
pleted but not yet published. Such studies also will allow determination of
the range of reactions experienced by patients allergic to a specific food at
the ED05 dose.
Other factors Concerns have arisen about the possibility of differences
between controlled clinical challenge trials and reactions occurring within
the community due to additional factors that are not controlled in an OFC,
such as dose of exposure, medication status, coexisting clinical conditions
(e.g., influenza or other acute or chronic illness) (Crevel et al., 2014).
Box 7A-1 includes several host-related factors that should be recognized
and could be considered. Data on the impact of these host-related factors
on the NOAELs and the LOAELs are extremely limited. Some of these
sources of variability, such as certain biological cycles (e.g., circadian),
psychological factors, stress, and concomitant allergen exposures (e.g.,
seasonal pollen) are likely already incorporated implicitly into the threshold
datasets because attempts are not made to control these factors during clini­
cal challenges. Others, such as genetic predisposition and host–environment
interactions, have not been well studied. The assumption is that they would
likely yield small differences in estimated population thresholds. The quan­
titative impact of other uncertainty factors (e.g., menstrual status, physical
activity, health and medication status, and alcohol usage) on population
threshold estimates, including individual NOAELs and LOAELs, has not
been well investigated but is acknowledged to be potentially important.
Certainly ample, mostly anecdotal, evidence exists that exercise can be a
determinant of reaction occurrence, and food-dependent, exercise-induced
allergy (FDEIA) is a well-documented condition (Wong and Krishna, 2013).
However, the association between FDEIA and individual NOAEL and
LOAEL has not been studied. Menstrual cycles seem to be a factor in oral
immunotherapy trials (Varshney et al., 2009) suggesting that they might
affect individual NOAEL and LOAEL as well. These factors can ideally be
addressed in clinical guidance where patients are given personalized advice
about behavior (Crevel et al., 2014) but currently this advice is probably
not consistently given to patients. Further studies are needed on allergic
reactions occurring within the community setting to determine whether
exposure dose is the key determinant of reaction occurrence and severity
and identify any role that these other factors might play. Despite these host­

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

327

related concerns, the imposition of additional uncertainty factors in the
establishment of Reference Doses has not been suggested in part because
the EDp values used for Reference Doses are already quite low (ED01 or
95 percent lower confidence interval of ED05 and probabilistic modeling
integrates uncertainty and variability into the approach (Crevel et al., 2014;
Taylor et al., 2014).
Exposure Assessment as an Input to Risk Assessment
Exposure assessment has two components: the level of contamination
(concentration and frequency) and the intake (amount and frequency) of
the particular food. These two components of contamination and intake
or consumption can be used in quantitative risk assessment to generate an
allergen intake distribution in terms of protein from the allergenic food.
Probabilistic modeling can then be used to estimate the probability of an
allergic reaction occurring based on the concentration of the allergen in
the product, the amount of product consumed, and the probability that
an allergic person with a threshold lower than dose of the allergen would
consume the allergen. Several variables must be considered in developing
an accurate exposure assessment.
Concentration of the Allergenic Residues in Foods
The overall food allergen distribution also requires knowledge of the con­
centration of allergenic food residue (or protein from the allergenic source) in
the particular food in question. The concentration of the allergenic food resi­
due can be determined either through calculation or by quantitative analysis
of the ingredient or finished food product in question. Calculation can be
made in instances where the allergenic food or food ingredient was inadver­
tently included in a formulation at a consistent level (e.g., a supplier changed
the formulation of a component of the finished food to include a milk ingre­
dient but failed to notify the manufacturer of the finished food). However,
calculation cannot be used in most circumstances because the unintended
allergen residues arise from the use of shared facilities or equipment at the
food manufacturing site or at the site of a supplier. In those cases, quantita­
tive analysis of the food product or ingredient is the most common approach
to determining the concentration of the allergenic residue. In IgE-mediated
food allergy, specific proteins from the allergenic source are involved in
binding to IgE and initiating the allergic reactions. The quantitative methods
used to determine the concentration of allergenic food residues should ide­
ally detect proteins from the allergenic source either as total source protein, a
certain protein fraction (e.g., casein), or a specific allergen (e.g., Ara h 1 from
peanut). However, for risk assessment, it is critical to express the analytical

328

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

result as a concentration of total protein from the allergenic source so that
it matches to the human threshold data from clinical challenges expressed
as doses of protein from the allergenic source as has been explained above.
Box 7A-2 describes current methods to detect allergen residues. Although
immunochemical methods, such as Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays
(ELISAs), are widely used and various kits are commercialized, many fac­
tors can affect the reliability of estimates of the allergenic protein residues
occurring in food products. The selection of the best ELISA method is of
paramount importance but that choice is often not straightforward nor well
comprehended.
Probabilistic risk assessment can incorporate a distribution of concen­
trations for the unintended allergenic food residue into the risk assessment
model. Analytical assessment of a number of samples taken from a batch
or multiple batches of production can be used to establish a distribution of
the concentration of allergenic residue that may be expected over time dur­
ing a production cycle. Selecting a sufficient number of samples to obtain a
representative distribution of the expected concentration of the allergenic
residue is somewhat straightforward when the allergenic residue of con­
cern is homogeneously distributed in the product of interest. However,
sampling becomes more difficult when the source of contamination is due
to particulates that can be randomly distributed throughout the product
in question. In this instance, the likelihood and size distribution of the
particulates, along with the dose distribution (based on the expected size
distribution of the particles) can be included as input variables in the risk
assessment model.
Consumption of Foods by Allergic Individuals
Food allergy reactions, especially IgE-mediated reactions, occur within
minutes to hours after ingestion of the offending food. Therefore, the
exposure scenario is based on intake of the specific food during a single
eating occasion rather than cumulative exposures. The food intake patterns
of consumers are typically obtained from national food surveys such as
the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey conducted by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Center for Health
Statistics. However, the use of national food surveys for food allergen risk
assessments assumes that the food intake of people with allergies is the
same as that of the general population. Ideally, for the quantitative risk
assessment of allergenic foods, the focus should be placed on the risk for
those who consume the foods as opposed to the overall mean intake levels
of the food (Crevel et al., 2014). The food consumption patterns of indi­
viduals with food allergy require further evaluation.
Another important, and often incorrect, assumption is that consumers

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

BOX 7A-2
Detection Methods for Allergen Residues
Immunochemical methods. These methods, primarily Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISAs), have become the food industry standard for both
qualitative and quantitative detection of allergen residues in food products or on
equipment contact surfaces (Jackson et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2010). ELISAs
detect protein(s) from the allergenic source of interest, are sufficiently sensitive
with detection limits in the low parts per million (ppm) (mg/kg) range, and provide
rapid assessments especially when used in a qualitative format, such as lateral
flow strips (Jackson et al., 2008). ELISA methods have limitations: (1) lack of
standardization (e.g., results are not always reported as concentration of total allergenic protein from the source) and validation (Abbott et al., 2010); (2) kits use
of a variety of IgG antibodies, which can affect the reliability of results; (3) kits
use either monoclonal antibodies or polyclonal antisera, which vary in terms of
specificity against the allergen (e.g., one peanut ELISA kit detected primarily Ara
h 2, a heat-stable and especially potent peanut allergen that may be a preferable
target for heat-processed foods (Jayasena et al., 2015); and (4) the extraction of
allergenic foods can be affected by aggregation, which reduces solubility (Downs
and Taylor, 2010), and by the nature of the food matrix.
Mass spectrometry. The use of mass spectrometry methods for the qualitative and quantitative detection of allergenic food proteins has been explored
in recent years (Johnson et al., 2011). Like ELISA, mass spectrometry methods
can detect the allergenic proteins of interest and thus can provide a direct evaluation of the level of allergenic residue of concern for risk assessment purposes.
Mass spectrometry methods may have the ability to detect multiple food allergen
residues simultaneously but considerable method development will be needed
to achieve that goal (Heick et al., 2011). The sensitivity of mass spectrometry
methods approaches that of ELISA methods in several food matrices. Because
mass spectrometry is not as widely available as ELISA, mass spectrometry will
most likely be used as a reliable confirmatory method in the foreseeable future.
Polymerase chain reaction. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods
are available to detect deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from a number of allergenic
sources, including several sources where ELISA methods may not be available.
However, PCR tests do not detect proteins from the allergenic source so their
utility in food allergy risk assessment is limited (van Hengel, 2007).
Adenosine Tri-Phosphate and total protein methods. Other analytical methods such as the Adenosine Tri-Phosphate (ATP) test and total protein
tests, are used by food industry for routine monitoring of cleaning and sanitation
(Jackson et al., 2008). Although these methods are useful tools for monitoring the
cleaning process, they do not provide the quantitative detection of specific proteins from the allergenic source of interest that is needed to conduct a thorough
risk assessment.

329

330

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

in countries where national consumption surveys do not exist behave simi­
larly to U.S. or British consumers with respect to food consumption. Finally,
the frequency of intake and the amount of food consumed by users of the
particular product are also considered within quantitative risk assessment.
Often the intake amounts of the 90th or 95th percentile user is taken to
assure a worst-case assessment. Finally, a single meal could contain more
than one source of a particular unanticipated allergen. The probability of
such combined exposures is generally quite small and often ignored, but a
discussion of its possible impact is available (Crevel et al., 2014).
REFERENCES
Abbott, M., S. Hayward, W. Ross, S. B. Godefroy, F. Ulberth, A. J. Van Hengel, J. Roberts, H.
Akiyama, B. Popping, J. M. Yeung, P. Wehling, S. L. Taylor, R. E. Poms, and P. Delahaut.
2010. Validation procedures for quantitative food allergen ELISA methods: Community
guidance and best practices. J AOAC Int 93(2):442-450.
Allen, K. J., B. C. Remington, J. L. Baumert, R. W. Crevel, G. F. Houben, S. Brooke-Taylor,
A. G. Kruizinga, and S. L. Taylor. 2014. Allergen reference doses for precautionary label­
ing (VITAL 2.0): Clinical implications. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(1):156-164.
Ballmer-Weber, B. K., M. Fernandez-Rivas, K. Beyer, M. Defernez, M. Sperrin, A. R. Mackie,
L. J. Salt, J. O. Hourihane, R. Asero, S. Belohlavkova, M. Kowalski, F. de Blay, N. G.
Papadopoulos, M. Clausen, A. C. Knulst, G. Roberts, T. Popov, A. B. Sprikkelman,
R. Dubakiene, S. Vieths, R. van Ree, R. Crevel, and E. N. Mills. 2015. How much is
too much? Threshold dose distributions for 5 food allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol
135(4):964-971.
Bindslev-Jensen, C., B. K. Ballmer-Weber, U. Bengtsson, C. Blanco, C. Ebner, J. Hourihane,
A. C. Knulst, D. A. Moneret-Vautrin, K. Nekam, B. Niggemann, M. Osterballe, C.
Ortolani, J. Ring, C. Schnopp, T. Werfel, European Academy of Allergology, and Clinical
Immunology. 2004. Standardization of food challenges in patients with immediate reac­
tions to foods—Position paper from the European Academy of Allergology and Clinical
Immunology. Allergy 59(7):690-697.
Blumchen, K., A. Beder, J. Beschorner, F. Ahrens, A. Gruebl, E. Hamelmann, G. Hansen, A.
Heinzmann, K. Nemat, B. Niggemann, U. Wahn, and K. Beyer. 2014. Modified oral food
challenge used with sensitization biomarkers provides more real-life clinical thresholds
for peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 134(2):390-398.
Bock, S. A., H. A. Sampson, F. M. Atkins, R. S. Zeiger, S. Lehrer, M. Sachs, R. K. Bush, and
D. D. Metcalfe. 1988. Double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge (DBPCFC) as an
office procedure: A manual. J Allergy Clin Immunol 82(6):986-997.
Cochrane, S. A., L. J. Salt, E. Wantling, A. Rogers, J. Coutts, B. K. Ballmer-Weber, P. Fritsche,
M. Fernandez-Rivas, I. Reig, A. Knulst, T. M. Le, R. Asero, K. Beyer, M. Golding, R.
Crevel, E. N. Clare Mills, and A. R. Mackie. 2012. Development of a standardized
low-dose double-blind placebo-controlled challenge vehicle for the EuroPrevall project.
Allergy 67(1):107-113.
Crevel, R. W., J. L. Baumert, A. Baka, G. F. Houben, A. C. Knulst, A. G. Kruizinga, S. Luccioli,
S. L. Taylor, and C. B. Madsen. 2014. Development and evolution of risk assessment for
food allergens. Food Chem Toxicol 67:262-276.
Downs, M. L., and S. L. Taylor. 2010. Effects of thermal processing on the Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) detection of milk residues in a model food matrix. J Agric
Food Chem 58(18):10085-10091.

MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGED FOODS

331

Flinterman, A. E., S. G. Pasmans, M. O. Hoekstra, Y. Meijer, E. van Hoffen, E. F. Knol, S. L.
Hefle, C. A. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, and A. C. Knulst. 2006. Determination of no-observed­
adverse-effect levels and eliciting doses in a representative group of peanut-sensitized
children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 117(2):448-454.
Grimshaw, K. E., R. M. King, J. A. Nordlee, S. L. Hefle, J. O. Warner, and J. O. Hourihane.
2003. Presentation of allergen in different food preparations affects the nature of the
allergic reaction—A case series. Clin Exp Allergy 33(11):1581-1585.
Heick, J., M. Fischer, S. Kerbach, U. Tamm, and B. Popping. 2011. Application of a liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry method for the simultaneous detection of
seven allergenic foods in flour and bread and comparison of the method with commer­
cially available ELISA test kits. J AOAC Int 94:1060-1068.
Jackson, L. S., F. M. Al-Taher, M. Moorman, J. W. DeVries, R. Tippett, K. M. Swanson, T. J.
Fu, R. Salter, G. Dunaif, S. Estes, S. Albillos, and S. M. Gendel. 2008. Cleaning and other
control and validation strategies to prevent allergen cross-contact in food-processing
operations. J Food Prot 71(2):445-458.
Jayasena, S., M. Smits, D. Fiechter, A. de Jong, J. Nordlee, J. Baumert, S. L. Taylor, R. H.
Pieters, and S. J. Koppelman. 2015. Comparison of six commercial ELISA kits for their
specificity and sensitivity in detecting different major peanut allergens. J Agric Food
Chem 63(6):1849-1855.
Johnson, P. E., S. Baumgartner, T. Aldick, C. Bessant, V. Giosafatto, J. Heick, G. Mamone,
G. O’Connor, R. Poms, B. Popping, A. Reuter, F. Ulberth, A. Watson, L. Monaci, and
E. N. Mills. 2011. Current perspectives and recommendations for the development of
mass spectrometry methods for the determination of allergens in foods. J AOAC Int
94(4):1026-1033.
Keet, C. A., E. C. Matsui, G. Dhillon, P. Lenehan, M. Paterakis, and R. A. Wood. 2009. The
natural history of wheat allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 102(5):410-415.
Lemon-Mule, H., H. A. Sampson, S. H. Sicherer, W. G. Shreffler, S. Noone, and A. NowakWegrzyn. 2008. Immunologic changes in children with egg allergy ingesting extensively
heated egg. J Allergy Clin Immunol 122(5):977-983.
Luccioli, S., and E. K. Kwegyir-Afful. 2014. Benefits of understanding allergen thresholds. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 134(2):399-400.
Mackie, A., A. Knulst, T. M. Le, P. Bures, L. Salt, E. N. Mills, P. Malcolm, A. Andreou, and
B. K. Ballmer-Weber. 2012. High fat food increases gastric residence and thus thresh­
olds for objective symptoms in allergic patients. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research
56(11):1708-1714.
Nowak-Wegrzyn, A., K. A. Bloom, S. H. Sicherer, W. G. Shreffler, S. Noone, N. Wanich, and
H. A. Sampson. 2008. Tolerance to extensively heated milk in children with cow’s milk
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 122(2):342-347, 347.
Savage, J. H., A. J. Kaeding, E. C. Matsui, and R. A. Wood. 2010. The natural history of soy
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 125(3):683-686.
Sicherer, S. H., R. A. Wood, B. P. Vickery, S. M. Jones, A. H. Liu, D. M. Fleischer, P. Dawson,
L. Mayer, A. W. Burks, A. Grishin, D. Stablein, and H. A. Sampson. 2014. The natural
history of egg allergy in an observational cohort. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(2):492-499.
Taylor, S. L., S. L. Hefle, C. Bindslev-Jensen, F. M. Atkins, C. Andre, C. Bruijnzeel-Koomen,
A. W. Burks, R. K. Bush, M. Ebisawa, P. A. Eigenmann, A. Host, J. O. Hourihane, E.
Isolauri, D. J. Hill, A. Knulst, G. Lack, H. A. Sampson, D. A. Moneret-Vautrin, F. Rance,
P. A. Vadas, J. W. Yunginger, R. S. Zeiger, J. W. Salminen, C. Madsen, and P. Abbott.
2004. A consensus protocol for the determination of the threshold doses for allergenic
foods: How much is too much? Clin Exp Allergy 34(5):689-695.

332

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Taylor, S. L., R. W. Crevel, D. Sheffield, J. Kabourek, and J. Baumert. 2009. Threshold dose
for peanut: Risk characterization based upon published results from challenges of peanutallergic individuals. Food Chem Toxicol 47(6):1198-1204.
Taylor, S. L., D. A. Moneret-Vautrin, R. W. Crevel, D. Sheffield, M. Morisset, P. Dumont, B. C.
Remington, and J. L. Baumert. 2010. Threshold dose for peanut: Risk characterization
based upon diagnostic oral challenge of a series of 286 peanut-allergic individuals. Food
Chem Toxicol 48(3):814-819.
Taylor, S. L., J. L. Baumert, A. G. Kruizinga, B. C. Remington, R. W. Crevel, S. Brooke-Taylor,
K. J. Allen, Allergen Bureau of Australia and New Zealand, and G. Houben. 2014.
Establishment of Reference Doses for residues of allergenic foods: Report of the VITAL
Expert Panel. Food Chem Toxicol 63:9-17.
van Hengel, A. J. 2007. Food allergen detection methods and the challenge to protect foodallergic consumers. Anal Bioanal Chem 389(1):111-118.
Varshney, P., P. H. Steele, B. P. Vickery, J. A. Bird, A. Thyagarajan, A. M. Scurlock, T. T.
Perry, S. M. Jones, and A. W. Burks. 2009. Adverse reactions during peanut oral immu­
notherapy home dosing. J Allergy Clin Immunol 124(6):1351-1352.
Wang, X., O. A. Young, and D. P. Karl. 2010. Evaluation of cleaning procedures for allergen
control in a food industry environment. J Food Sci 75(9):T149-T155.
Wong, G. K., and M. T. Krishna. 2013. Food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis: Is
wheat unique? Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 13(6):639-644.
Wood, R. A., S. H. Sicherer, B. P. Vickery, S. M. Jones, A. H. Liu, D. M. Fleischer, A. K.
Henning, L. Mayer, A. W. Burks, A. Grishin, D. Stablein, and H. A. Sampson. 2013.
The natural history of milk allergy in an observational cohort. J Allergy Clin Immunol
131(3):805-812.
Zurzolo, G. A., K. J. Allen, S. L. Taylor, W. G. Shreffler, J. L. Baumert, M. L. Tang, L. C.
Gurrin, M. L. Mathai, J. A. Nordlee, A. Dunngalvin, and J. O. Hourihane. 2013. Peanut
Allergen Threshold Study (PATS): Validation of eliciting doses using a novel single-dose
challenge protocol. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 9(1):35.

8
Managing Food Allergies in Retail,
Food Service, Schools, Higher
Education, and Travel Settings

In Chapter 5, this report described current knowledge about how bio­
logical and environmental systems influence the development of food aller­
gies. The key roles of the individual, the family, and the health care system
in managing food allergies were addressed in Chapter 6. The food process­
ing industry also has an essential role in preventing food allergies, with their
ability to inform individuals at risk about the presence of allergens in pack­
aged foods, and this was discussed in Chapter 7. However, in order for an
individual with food allergy to manage his or her food allergy successfully,
it is vital to acknowledge the individual’s interactions with many social sys­
tems beyond those directly providing health care. These interactions were
outlined in the developmental and ecological model described in Chapter 1.
For example, after birth, a child has direct experiences with other people
and physical environments in addition to the health care system (e.g., early
care education settings). As they develop, children continue to interact with
numerous new systems, including peer groups, schools, and community
services for children and families. Eventually, children begin to interact
directly with media, workplaces, and social and recreational contexts, such
as sport teams, and religious or other cultural contexts. Although an indi­
vidual with food allergy must always try to avoid allergenic foods, direct
interactions with foods can occur in many of those settings and avoidance
is not easy. Moreover, settings that could be of concern for an individual
with food allergy change as an individual becomes more independent.
For adolescents and adults, who make many independent decisions about
food every day, the safety of their food environment is essential. Thus,
in addition to schools, the food environment includes many settings that
333

334

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

offer food information (media, food labels) and food itself (restaurants
and friends’ houses). It would not be feasible to include here a description
of how all these settings can influence the safety of individuals in regard
to food allergies. Rather, this chapter describes those that the committee
views as essential to consider in depth. Those selected settings—food service
and retail, schools and day care centers, higher education, and the travel
industry—are organized in the chapter from the more general (food retail
that everybody experiences) to the narrower (travel). For each setting, the
chapter emphasizes the current approaches (i.e., policies, guidelines, and
practices) to manage food allergies. The recommendations and research
needs related to these settings are at the end of the chapter.
FOOD RETAIL AND FOOD SERVICE
Consumers with food allergies must depend on personnel in restau­
rants, retail outlets, and retail food service establishments (e.g., ice cream
parlors, bakeries, grocery stores, food carts) to obtain allergen-safe foods.
Errors could be deadly. In two publications of case series of fatal foodallergic reactions in the United States, at least 17 of 63 deaths involved
restaurant meals or items from food services (Bock et al., 2001, 2007).
A systematic review of unexpected allergic reactions suggested that 21 to
31 percent occur in restaurants (Versluis et al., 2015). Errors resulting in
allergic reactions could occur from problems with communication from
the consumer or from a variety of circumstances in the establishment such
as hidden ingredients and cross-contact. Although most severe reactions
from food allergens originate from consumption of the relevant food and
the risk of an allergic reaction from environmental contact is rather low
(see Box 8-1), less severe food allergic reactions also have been reported
in food establishments (see Chapter 6; Furlong et al., 2001) and some of
those might be due to environmental exposures. In a survey directed to
understand allergic reactions in restaurant foods or other establishments, 7
(out of 156 episodes) were reported to be due to skin contact or inhalation
(i.e., due to residual food on tables, peanut shells covering floors, or being
within 2 feet of the cooking of the food).
Several studies have characterized potential problems in understand­
ing and managing food allergy on the part of restaurant and food service
staff. In 2006, Ahuja and Sicherer conducted a survey of 100 personnel (42
managers, 32 servers, 24 chefs, 2 other) in 100 establishments in the New
York City area (48 restaurants [17 continental, 19 Asian, 12 Italian], 18
fast food, 34 take-out [8 bakery, 13 ice cream, 9 Asian, 4 pizza]) (Ahuja and
Sicherer, 2007). The personnel turnover rate was high (on average, between
5 and 30 new staff per year), suggesting a serious challenge to training. Even
so, respondents reported high levels of comfort in providing “safe” meals.

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

335

BOX 8-1
Risk of Reaction from Environmental
Exposure to a Food Allergen
The primary route of exposure to a food allergen that can trigger serious
reactions, for example severe anaphylaxis or fatal reactions, is through ingestion
(Fleischer et al., 2012; Sampson et al., 2014). In 2003, Simonte et al. conducted
a challenge in children with peanut allergy to determine the clinical relevance of
exposure to peanut butter by means of inhalation and skin contact. Of the 30 children who underwent the challenge, none experienced a systemic or respiratory
reaction. The authors concluded that casual exposure to peanut butter (through
skin contact or air exposure) is unlikely to elicit significant allergic reactions
(Simonte et al., 2003). A study of peanut-sensitive children found that prolonged
skin contact with peanut butter led to localized urticarial (i.e., hives) in 41 percent
of the children and no children had a systemic reaction to skin exposure (Wainstein et al., 2007). In this case, the authors also concluded that systemic reactions
from skin contact with peanut butter are highly unlikely.
In terms of allergens in dust, Brough et al. hypothesized that the rates of
food allergy may be directly proportional to the amount of nonoral exposure an
individual has within a home (Brough et al., 2013a,b). They conducted a study
in which 45 homes were asked not to vacuum or wash their sheets for 5 days.
They found the highest concentration of peanut dust in a child’s play area and
discovered the most contaminated surface was the dishwasher handle. In general, the dust had more peanut protein than any surfaces. Peanut protein levels
in the air were virtually undetectable once shelling ended (Brough et al., 2013a)
and the authors concluded that residual dust levels after shelling had variable effect on activating basophils in the laboratory (Brough et al., 2013b). The authors
concluded that residual levels of peanut protein may sensitize, but probably will
not cause an allergic reaction.
A food allergen also can be present in its aerosolized form, for instance,
when boiling, steaming, or frying a food containing the allergen. This may provoke
the release of significant quantities of particulates (and allergenic protein) in the
form of vapor into the air, a potential factor to initiate a reaction after exposure to
the allergen by inhalation. Roberts et al. showed that children afflicted with both
asthma and immunoglobulin E (IgE)-meditated allergy developed early- and latephase asthmatic responses upon exposure to aerosolized food allergens (Roberts
et al., 2002). The children were exposed for 20 minutes to fish, chickpea, milk,
egg, or buckwheat as they were being cooked. Allergic reactions from such exposures have been described (Gonzalez-Mendiola et al., 2003; Martinez Alonso
et al., 2005; Vitaliti et al., 2012); such exposures are likely due to water soluble
protein in the cooking vapor.

A rating of “very” or “somewhat” comfortable was selected by 72 percent
for providing a safe meal and 70 percent for “guaranteeing” a safe meal.
Regarding food allergy training, 42 percent indicated prior training and 6
percent were unsure. Training was primarily (76 percent) through “one-on­

336

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

one” (apprentice) sessions rather than a set program. Importantly, respon­
dents did not show high understanding of food allergy when faced with
knowledge-based questions. For example, 24 percent thought that small
ingestions of the food were acceptable, 35 percent thought heat destroys
most allergens, 34 percent thought giving water is an appropriate response
to a consumer having an allergic reaction, 54 percent thought a buffet “kept
clean” was safe for an allergic patron, and 25 percent thought removing a
nut from a finished meal was safe. Only 22 percent of participants selected
the correct response for all five of the true-false questions. Rates of correct
responses did not vary significantly among managers, servers, and chefs.
Also, the number of correct responses was not associated with comfort level
for providing or guaranteeing a safe meal (P>0.9), suggesting that staff may
profess knowledge to a patron but lack understanding. In regard to train­
ing, 61 percent indicated an interest in future training programs, 22 percent
were not interested and 17 percent were unsure. Respondents were asked
whether they thought certification and regulation should be required for
food allergy education. To this question 55 percent agreed, 24 percent dis­
agreed, and 21 percent were unsure. Studies conducted in a similar manner
using the Ahuja and Sicherer (2007) survey in Brighton, United Kingdom
(Bailey et al., 2011), and in Turkey (Sogut et al., 2015) and other surveys
(Lee and Xu, 2015; Leitch et al., 2005; Mandalbach et al., 2005) have
come to similar conclusions. No studies of issues have been conducted for
retail food outlets, such as supermarkets that sell prepared foods, but these
outlets have particular food allergy–related issues that would be useful to
investigate in studies. These issues include take-away samples that are not
allergen labeled, nut butter grinding, self-serve areas, bulk bins, shellfish
steaming, open food preparation areas, and shared equipment.
The Food Code1 (FDA, 2013) provides advice from the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for uniform systems and practices that address
the safety of food that is sold in food service and certain retail establish­
ments. As of October 2015, all 50 states and the District of Columbia
1 The Food Code began with the activities of the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) in the
area of food protection, particularly studies on the role of milk in the spread of disease at
the turn of the 20th century. The first model code, Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance—
Recommendations of the PHS/Food and Drug Administration (FDA), was initially published
in 1924. Today, the FDA maintains an updated model food code, the FDA Food Code, to
assist food control jurisdictions at all levels of government. The model Food Code is neither
federal law nor federal regulation and is not preemptive. Instead, it is a model code and ref­
erence document for state, city, county, and tribal agencies that regulate operations such as
restaurants, retail food stores, food vendors, and foodservice operations in institutions, such as
schools, hospitals, assisted living, nursing homes, and child care centers. It is developed by the
Conference of Food Protection, a nonprofit organization created to provide a formal process
to develop food safety guidance. Members of industry, regulatory, academia, and consumer
and professional organizations contribute to the development of the Food Code.

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

337

have adopted codes patterned after previous versions of the FDA Food
Code, but only 7 states have adopted the 2013 Food Code, which includes
food allergen provisions (see the Annex of this chapter for selected 2013
Food Code provisions) based on the 2004 Food Allergen Labeling and Con­
sumer Protection Act.2 The 2013 Food Code defines “major food allergens”
and suggests that a “person in charge” who can respond correctly to an
inspector’s questions about the specific food operation should be present
during all hours of operations. The areas of knowledge include the identi­
fication of major food allergens and food allergy symptoms in a sensitive
individual who has an allergic reaction. The Food Code also references the
need for restaurant and food service managers “to be aware of the serious
nature of food allergies” and “to avoid cross-contact during food prepa­
ration and service.” In addition, the Food Code indicates that the person
in charge shall ensure that employees are properly trained in food allergy
awareness. That statement “allows industry to develop and implement
operational-specific training programs for food employees.” However, “it is
not intended to require that all food employees pass a test that is part of an
accredited program.” The Food Code also mandates the information that
should appear on a label. The Food Code does not provide specific advice
on methods to ensure safety for those with food allergy, but does provide
specific procedures about activities such as general cleaning, managing raw
foods, and other details aimed primarily at reducing infection risks.
Individual states in the United States decide upon adoption of the
Food Code. As mentioned above, only seven states have adopted the
2013 Food Code, which includes the provisions relevant to food aller­
gies. In addition, several states (i.e., Massachusetts, Michigan, Rhode
Island, Virginia) have adopted food allergy laws that include requirements
for informative posters with notices such as “Before placing your order,
please inform your server if a person in your party has a food allergy,”
and requirements that food safety managers complete required training
courses, among other provisions (FARE, 2016a).
Food allergy training is available for personnel in food establishments
from several resources. For example, the National Restaurant Association’s
ServSafe is a 1.5- to 2-hour online course that addresses issues, including
defining food allergens, recognizing symptoms, identifying allergens, dan­
gers of cross-contact, proper cleaning methods, proper communication,
workstations and self-serve areas, special dietary requests, dealing with
emergencies, importance of food labels, handling food deliveries, proper
2 Public Law 282, 108th Cong., 2nd sess. (August 2, 2004). The Food Allergen Labeling and
Consumer Protection Act mandates that the labels of foods containing major food allergens
(milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts, wheat, soy, fish, and crustacean shellfish) declare the allergen in
plain language.

338

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

food preparation, and cleaning and personal hygiene. Many additional
programs are available through vendors, and individual companies also
have created their own programs. A study of such educational programs
suggest they are effective at improving knowledge and changes in practice
(Bailey et al., 2014).
EARLY CARE AND EDUCATION SETTINGS AND SCHOOLS
Early care and education settings and schools play an important role in
the lives of our children. Although a parent can rather effectively alter the
food environment at home to accommodate the needs of a child with food
allergy, these types of accommodation become more complex and difficult
to implement outside the home.
It has been reported that 16 to 18 percent of school-aged children with
food allergy have experienced a reaction in school (Nowak-Wegrzyn et al.,
2001; Sicherer et al., 2001). However, although the potential of a reaction
from skin exposure to dust with allergen particles exists, the studies to date
do not indicate that the risk of reactions, especially severe reactions, is high
from environmental exposures (see Box 8-1).
Schools can be a risky setting in which to suffer a severe reaction, such
as anaphylaxis. Alarmingly, one study noted that 24 percent of the severe
and potentially life-threatening reactions (anaphylaxis) that were reported
at schools occurred in children who had no previous diagnosis of food
allergy (McIntyre et al., 2005). In a case series of food allergy–related fatali­
ties in children, 9 of 32 happened in school and were associated primarily
with significant delays in administering epinephrine (Bock et al., 2001).
However, the majority of food allergic reactions that occur in preschooland school-aged children are not anaphylaxis (Boros et al., 2000; Gold
and Sainsbury, 2000) and deaths are rare overall (Macdougall et al., 2002;
Umasunthar et al., 2013).
State Laws for School Settings
Fortunately, much progress has been made in the area of ensuring
appropriate access to medical treatment for anaphylaxis. In 2013, the
School Access to Emergency Epinephrine Act3 authorized the U.S. Depart­
ment of Health and Human Services to give funding preferences to schools
if they maintain an emergency supply of epinephrine and if they develop
a plan so that epinephrine can be administered at the school. Since then,
almost all states have authorized schools to keep medications on hand to
treat severe allergic reactions, with 10 states requiring schools to keep epi­
3 Public Law 48, 113th Cong., 1st sess. (November 13, 2013).

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

339

nephrine auto-injectors on hand (AAFA, 2015). Furthermore, every state
grants students the right to carry and use their anaphylaxis medications
while at school and most states have approved laws that allow for stocking
of epinephrine auto-injectors at school (FARE, 2016b). The Chicago Public
Schools, for example, implemented an initiative to stock undesignated epi­
nephrine auto-injectors in all of its schools. The importance of this initiative
based on the use of undesignated epinephrine auto-injectors for food allergy
has been reported (DeSantiago-Cardenas et al., 2015). However, implemen­
tation of these laws requires training personnel in recognizing symptoms,
in administering medication, and in following best practices, and the laws
are not monitored by any government agency. According to the nonprofit
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America (AAFA), school settings lag
in prompt recognition of allergic reactions and anaphylaxis, treatment of
reactions, and extension of these goals to address previously undiagnosed
children. This is especially problematic in early care and education settings
and schools that lack access to a medical provider, such as a school nurse. It
is estimated that 25 percent of schools have no school nurse (AAFA, 2015),
and the number of early care and education settings that have access to a
nurse is unknown.
Since 2008, the AAFA has identified U.S. states with the best public
policies for children and youth in elementary, middle, and high schools
who have asthma, food allergy, related allergic diseases, or who have expe­
rienced anaphylaxis. All states and the District of Columbia are assessed
for 23 standards that are grouped into three broad categories (medications
and treatment, awareness, and school environment). In the 2015 report,
14 states met the standards for being a State Honor Roll of Asthma and
Allergy Policies for Schools (AAFA, 2015).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention School Guidelines
In 2011, Congress passed the FDA Food Safety Modernization Act4 in
an effort to improve food safety in the United States by focusing on preven­
tion. Section 112 of the act calls for the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) to develop voluntary guidelines for schools and early
care and education settings to help them manage the risk of food allergy
and severe reactions in children. Accordingly, in 2013, the CDC, in con­
sultation with the U.S. Department of Education and others, developed the
Voluntary Guidelines for Managing Food Allergies in Schools and Early
Care and Education Programs (CDC, 2013). (Box 8-2 lists the complete
set of topics that are included in the CDC guidelines.)

4 Public Law 353, 111th Cong., 2d sess. (January 4, 2011).

340

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

BOX 8-2
Topics included in the Voluntary Guidelines for Managing Food
Allergies in Schools and Early Care and Education Programs
Section 1. Food Allergy Management in Schools and Early Care and
Education Programs
Essential First Steps
1. Use a Coordinated Approach That Is Based on Effective Partnerships
2. Provide Clear Leadership to Guide Planning and Ensure Implementation
of Food Allergy Management Plans and Practices
3. Develop and Implement a Comprehensive Plan for Managing Food
Allergies
Priorities for Managing Food Allergies
1. Ensure the Daily Management of Food Allergies for Individual Children
2. Prepare for Food Allergy Emergencies
3. Provide Professional Development on Food Allergies for Staff
4. Educate Children and Family Members About Food Allergies
5. Create and Maintain a Healthy and Safe Educational Environment
Food Allergy Management and Prevention Plan Checklist
Section 2. Putting Guidelines into Practice: Actions for School Boards and
District Staff
School Board Members
School District Superintendent
Health Services Director
Student Support Services Director
District School Food Service Director

The Voluntary Guidelines for Managing Food Allergies calls for Food
Allergy Management and Prevention Plans (FAMPPs) to
•
•
•
•

Meet the requirements of federal, state, and local laws and
regulations;
Reflect clear goals, purposes, and expectations for food allergy
management that are consistent with the school’s or early child­
hood education program’s mission and policies;
Be clear and easy to understand and implement;
Be responsive to the needs of any child with food allergy by taking
into account the different and unique requirements of each child;
and

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

341

Section 3. Putting Guidelines into Practice: Actions for School
Administrators and Staff
School Administrators
Registered School Nurses
School Doctors
Health Assistants, Health Aides, and Other Unlicensed Assistive Personnel
Classroom Teachers
School Food Service Managers and Staff
School Counselors and Other Mental Health Services Staff
Bus Drivers and School Transportation Staff
Facilities and Maintenance Staff
Section 4. Putting Guidelines into Practice: Actions for Early Care and
Education Administrators and Staff
Program Directors and Family Child Care Providers
Child Care Providers, Preschool Teachers, Teaching Assistants, Volunteers,
Aides, and Other Staff
Nutrition Services Staff
Health Services Staff
Section 5. Federal Laws and Regulations That Govern Food Allergies in
Schools and Early Care and Education Programs
Section 6. Food Allergy Resources

•

Be adaptable and updated regularly on the basis of experiences,
best practices, current research and changes in district policy or
state or county law.

The Guidelines recommendations include five priority areas that should
be addressed in each FAMPP. These are (1) ensure the daily management
of food allergy in individual children, which includes the child’s Emergency
Care Plan5 (see Chapter 6), (2) prepare for food allergy emergencies, (3)
5 Emergency Care Plan for Anaphylaxis or Allergy and Anaphylaxis is a plan written by the
physician or health care provider and the patient and family that serves to notify the school
about a potentially life-threatening food allergy and about a management approach. These
plans come in many forms, but, to date, none is standardized. Key features include the child’s
name, weight, identifying information (child’s picture, if provided), specifics about the food

342

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

provide professional development on food allergies for staff members, (4)
educate children and family members about food allergy, and (5) create
and maintain a healthy and safe educational environment. To help with
dissemination and adoption of the guidelines, the CDC has developed a tool
kit for schools and early care and education programs (http://www.cdc.gov/
healthyschools/foodallergies/toolkit.htm [accessed January 6, 2017]). The
extent of implementation of the Guidelines is unknown. However, it has
been documented that the use of emergency care plans is less than desir­
able. For example, in a study of the Chicago Public School district, the third
largest public school district in the United States, only half of students with
food allergy had filed a health management plan with their school (Gupta
et al., 2014). In the same study the authors found that Black and Hispanic
and low-income students were less likely to have a school health manage­
ment plan than Caucasian and higher income students.
Unlike the United States, Australia mandated in 2014 that all schools
(including private schools) must comply with Ministerial Order 7066 if they
have a student enrolled who is at risk of anaphylaxis. This law requires
schools to
•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•

Develop a school Anaphylaxis Management Policy;
Develop and review Individual Anaphylaxis Management Plans
for affected students, which include an individual Australasian
Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (ASCIA) Action Plan
for Anaphylaxis;
Identify and train school staff in anaphylaxis management;
Purchase backup adrenaline auto-injectors for general use;
Complete an annual Anaphylaxis Risk Management Checklist;
Develop a Communication Plan that ensures that all school staff
(including volunteers and casual staff), students, and parents are
provided with information about anaphylaxis and the school’s
Anaphylaxis Management Policy;
Identify prevention strategies to be used by the school to minimize
the risk of an anaphylactic reaction; and
Develop School First Aid and Emergency Response Procedures that
can be followed when responding to an anaphylactic reaction.

allergy or allergies, medications and doses, descriptions of possible symptoms and related
treatment instructions, advice to activate emergency services, and family contact information
(see also Chapter 6).
6 Victorian code 706. Anaphylaxis management in Victorian schools. See http://www.
education.vic.gov.au/Documents/school/teachers/health/Anaphylaxis_MinisterialOrder706.pdf
(accessed June 26, 2016).

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

343

Other Federal Policies
Meanwhile, other federal laws, such as the FDA Food Code (explained
in more detail above), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973,7
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)8 and the Richard B. Russell
National School Lunch Act9 as well as state laws in 15 states, pertain to
children with food allergy and need to be considered when schools or
early care and education settings create management prevention plans,
such as FAMPPs. While it is duly noted that the management prevention
plans are voluntary, if an individual plan is developed for a child with
food allergy, by law it is considered an education record for the purposes
of Section 444 of the General Education Provisions Act (better known as
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act).10 In addition, if a school
or early care and education setting participates in the School Nutrition
Programs (i.e., National School Lunch and School Breakfast Programs,
the Special Milk Program, and the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program),
then the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) nondiscrimination regu­
lation (7 CFR 15b) and the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act
must be followed. These policies state that accommodations to program
meals must be made for children who are determined to have a food
allergy disability. Furthermore, USDA Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
guidance requires that accommodations must be made at no additional
cost to the student, that a food allergy or intolerance impacting a major
bodily function (i.e., digestive or respiratory system) must be considered
a disability, and that a medical statement from a state-licensed health care
professional authorized to write medical prescriptions should be provided
to school administrators in certain situations. FNS issued a memorandum
in September 2016 (SP 59-2016) that clarifies these requirements. FNS is
currently conducting training on the requirements and revising guidance
so that current versions of the ADA, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)11
are incorporated.
In addition, FNS has developed food safety guidelines specifically tar­
geted at school nutrition directors. These guidelines include a section on
managing food allergies with references to many resources (USDA, 2016).
7 Public Law 112, 93rd Cong., 1st sess. (September 26, 1973).
8 Public Law 336, 101st Cong., 2d. sess. (July 26, 1990). The ADA defines a person with
a disability as “a person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more major life activity.” Major life activities include eating and therefore individu­
als with food allergies have a disability as defined by the ADA, particularly those with more
severe responses, such as difficulty swallowing and breathing, asthma, or anaphylactic shock.
9 Public Law 396, 79th Cong., 2d sess. (June 4, 1946).
10 Public Law 380, 93rd Cong., 2d sess. (August 21, 1974).
11 Public Law 142, 94th Cong., 1st sess. (November 29, 1975).

344

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Also, FNS has funded other initiatives related to food allergies through
the Institute of Child Nutrition,12 which offers resources in many for­
mats and conducts training and research. For example, it offers a 4-hour
online course on “Managing Food Allergies in School Nutrition Programs”
directed to district school nutrition directors and supervisors, managers,
and food service assistants and technicians. Many of the resources also are
available in Spanish. FNS is updating these resources so that they reflect the
requirements included in SP 59-2016.
The FDA Food Code
Like other food establishments, school cafeterias must comply with the
version of the FDA Food Code adopted by the local or state government.
As mentioned above, as of October 2015, only seven states have adopted
the 2013 versions of the FDA Food Code dated after the implementation
of the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act (FALCPA) in
January 1, 2006, which includes new provisions regarding food allergens.
The Annex to this chapter includes some highlights of the 2013 FDA
Food Code relevant to food allergy, including some of the new provisions.
The 2013 FDA Food Code recognizes the importance of restaurant and
retail food service managers by adding a provision to ensure that the food
safety training of employees includes food allergy awareness. FALCPA also
requires that the FDA works in cooperation with the Conference for Food
Protection to pursue revision of the Food Code to provide guidelines for
preparing allergen free foods in food establishments, including elementary
and secondary school cafeterias.
HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS
As Chapter 6 argues, adolescents are particularly at risk when it comes
to food allergy. As adolescents continue from high school into higher
education, they are increasingly less dependent on guardians or parents to
remain safe, and the physical separation that often occurs by leaving home
coincides with their desire for independence. Perhaps for this reason, young
adults may prefer to manage their food allergy on their own as they enter
institutions of higher education. It appears that fewer regulations govern
the management of food allergy in higher education institutions.
12 The Institute of Child Nutrition at the University of Mississippi was established by Con­
gress in the Child Nutrition and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women,
Infants, and Children (WIC) Reauthorization Act of 1989 and funded by a grant administered
through the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Food and Nutrition Service (FNS). The
Institute’s mission is to provide information and services that promote the continuous improve­
ment of child nutrition programs.

345

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

Some of the obvious policies and resources that help students with
managing food allergy at a college or university are described in this sec­
tion. Schools vary considerably in their food service structure but their
facilities generally include various cafeteria-style facilities and fast-food res­
taurants. In addition to the role of food service in preventing food allergy,
other staff influence aspects of college life that have a potential impact.
These staff also have a responsibility to work with students and families
to ensure the proper management of food allergy and adequate quality of
life and well-being for the students. Campus health centers, for example,
are important institutions as they offer diagnostic services, and tools and
management approaches for individuals (see Chapter 6 for a discussion of
the health care system, which includes campus health centers). In addition,
campus housing has a role in working with students who have food allergy
and determining their needs. This section briefly refers to these diverse areas
in a higher education setting where policies and procedures need to consider
the needs of individuals with food allergy.
Federal and State Policies
Cafeterias or restaurants, when defined by the local and state govern­
ments as a food establishment, need to follow the version of U.S. Food
Code adopted by the relevant state or local government. However, as
explained above, not all states have adopted the most recent version of the
Food Code, the 2013 Food Code, which includes new important provisions
related to food allergy, such as training of personnel and food labeling (see
above and the Annex for details on these provisions).
Although no other specific federal or state policies cover higher educa­
tion in regard to food allergies, some broader policies apply. For example,
as noted earlier, food allergy might be considered a disability under the
ADA. In fact, in 2009, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) received a
complaint about violations of the ADA public accommodations provision
at Lesley University in Cambridge, Massachusetts, related to students with
celiac disease and/or food allergy. After concluding that violations had
occurred, the DOJ entered into an agreement with the university “to ensure
that its students with celiac disease and other food allergies can fully and
equally enjoy the university’s meal plan and food services” (DOJ, 2012).
This was a key decision that will guide any future decision regarding imple­
mentation and enforcement of the ADA public accommodations provision.
Other Policies
Until recently, no specific guidelines had been developed on recom­
mended practices to manage and prevent food allergy in higher education.

346

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

With this goal in mind, the Food Allergy Research Education College Food
Allergy Program13 was launched in 2014. The program provides the first
guideline with details about processes that must be in place at a college or
university to ensure safety. The guideline helps officials develop uniform
policies to successfully manage food allergy in this setting. It addresses all
aspects of college life that are relevant to food allergy, including dining
services, health services, resident life, social well-being, disability accommo­
dations, and emergency services. It emphasizes the need for comprehensive
policies (e.g., a clear process for requesting accommodations), emergency
response plans, process transparency and documentation, individual confi­
dentiality, effective outreaching, staff training, and methods for assessment.
The program is very flexible, being sensitive to the varying resources among
colleges and universities. The program is being tested in 12 colleges and
universities with the hope that others will join.
As a pilot program, some barriers have already been identified (Haas,
2015), such as the challenges of gathering accurate information about food
allergens in food and food ingredients from food manufacturers, gathering
adequate resources for implementation of the guideline, and identifying
practical measures of success.
FOOD ALLERGIES AND THE TRAVEL INDUSTRY
Flying with Food Allergies14
Patients with food allergy can have serious reactions to small quantities
of an allergen and, as previously discussed, allergen avoidance is currently
the only management approach to minimize the risk of an allergic reaction.
When flying, avoidance might appear more difficult because spending hours
in a closed environment might increase the risk of contact with a food
allergen when food is served or other passengers bring food. This perceived
higher risk can exacerbate anxiety in passengers with food allergy. Although
peanut has become a center of focus in research and in the media, any food
allergy can be a concern to a flyer.
Few data are available on the percentage of food allergy reactions
13 The Food Allergy Research Education College Food Allergy Program was developed in
partnership with other organizations (the National Foundation for Celiac Awareness; the
National Association of College & University Food Services) and food allergy experts, col­
lege and university representatives, and industry representatives. The program, including the
guidelines and other resources for prospective and current students with food allergy, can be
found at http://www.foodallergy.org/resources-for/colleges-universities/college-food-allergy­
program (accessed January 6, 2017).
14 Considerations while traveling on other modes of transport should be the same, especially
if food is served to travelers.

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

347

among those with food allergies while flying. In a 2008 study, Comstock
et al. reported that in a sample of 471 individuals with peanut, tree nut, or
seed allergy, approximately 9 percent (41 individuals) reported an allergic
reaction to food while on board an airplane. Six of these reactions were
serious and potentially life-threatening (Comstock et al., 2008). Similar
findings emerged from an earlier study that interviewed participants in
the National Registry of Peanut and Tree Nut Allergy. Within a total of
3,704 registry participants, 62 reported a reaction associated with airline
travel, with reaction severity correlating with exposure route (i.e., ingestion
led to the most severe reaction, with inhalation and skin contact result­
ing in progressively less severe reactions) (Sicherer et al., 1999). In 2008,
Greenhawt et al. tracked 150 self-reported reactions to peanut or tree nut
on an airline. Of these reactions, 33 percent were reported with symptoms
consistent with anaphylaxis but only 10 percent (15 individuals) of the total
number of individuals that reported a reaction were treated with epineph­
rine (Greenhawt et al., 2009). And 48 percent of individuals in the study
reported changing flying behavior in response to their reaction. In a survey
of 850 physicians who had been asked to provide medical assistance during
in-flight medical episodes, no cases relating to peanut allergy were reported
(Rayman, 2002). One case report also has been published. In this report,
a woman age 19 years experienced anaphylaxis during a transcontinental
flight after eating a meal that was reported to have been cooked in peanut
oil (Brady and Bright, 1999). Because this individual had a past medical his­
tory of asthma, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, and urticaria related to peanuts,
she had medications with her to treat allergic reactions.
Environmental Exposure to Food Allergens
In addition to the risk of exposure through accidental ingestion of an
allergen, travelers on airplanes also may worry about being exposed to an
allergenic food through contact with particles through skin or by breath­
ing aerosolized allergens. Although no studies have addressed the risk of
exposure and reaction on an actual commercial airline flight, studies have
been completed to determine whether contact by skin exposure or inhala­
tion can cause an allergic reaction in individuals with a peanut allergy (see
Box 8-1).
Based on these limited studies and reported cases on environmental
exposure to food allergens, the risk of a severe reaction from aerosolized
food allergens appears to be very low, except for children with both asthma
and food allergies.15 Likewise, the risk from skin exposure is low. However,
similar to other settings, individuals still need to be cautious about the
15 Occupational exposure to food allergens is not included in this report.

348

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

potential for severe reactions in an airplane environment in the case, for
example, of accidental transfer from the hand to the mouth if the seats or
other contact areas are not carefully cleaned.
Current Management of Food Allergies During Air Travel
Relevant Federal Policies on Flying with Food Allergy
The Americans with Disabilities Act and the Air Carrier Access Act The
Federal Aviation Act of 195816 was intended to ensure “safe and adequate
service” on airlines, but it primarily addressed fair prices and did not
address disabilities. In 1986, the Supreme Court found that Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act, the first U.S. protection for people with disabilities
that led to the 1990 ADA, applies only to accommodations in the airport,
not on airlines, as airlines do not receive federal funding.17 Subsequently,
the court found that the ADA also does not apply to airlines (Francoeur,
2015). The Air Carrier Access Act18 (ACAA) of 1986 covers all domes­
tic and most international flights and instituted much stricter regulation
regarding serving passengers with disabilities. The ACAA uses the same
definition of disability as the ADA, and the U.S. Department of Trans­
portation (DOT) was given authority19 to make regulations enforcing the
ACAA. Applying the ACAA to passengers with a food allergy could imply
the following:
•
•
•
•

The cost of accommodating special needs of passengers with food
allergy will not be passed on by the airlines to passengers.
Epinephrine is allowed on board in a medical kit, but flight atten­
dants may not use this without a doctor on board or without call­
ing down to a doctor on the ground.
Passengers are allowed to bring epinephrine on the airplane as long
as it had been prescribed.
Medical certificates are not necessary to prove that an individual
has a food allergy.

16 Public Law 726, 85th Cong., 2d sess. (August 23, 1958).
17 The Paralyzed Veterans brought a case under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act,
arguing that paralyzed veterans were entitled to certain rights when traveling on an airline
(U.S. Department of Transportation v. Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. 597 [Supreme Court,
1986]).
18 Public Law 435, 99th Cong., 2d sess. (October 2, 1986).
19 Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability in Air Travel, 14 CFR Part 382, 2003.

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

349

However, passengers can actually do very little if they feel discriminated
against for having a food allergy. The contract of carriage20 limits passen­
gers from filing a lawsuit against an airline for failure to make accommoda­
tions. Even if a passenger can file a complaint with a Complaint Resolution
Officer or with the DOT, the DOT is able to fine an airline or take it to
court only if there is a pattern of discrimination. Passengers cannot receive
any compensation in such cases (Francoeur, 2015). Data pertaining to
disability-related complaints filed to the DOT for all United States and
foreign air carriers are helpful for passengers to determine which airlines
have the most allergy-related complaints against them.21 In 2014, a total
of 968 allergy-related complaints were filed with the DOT. However, these
complaints are not separated by allergy, so it is likely that some allergy
complaints were not food-related.
Department of Transportation and Related Agencies Appropriations Act of
2000 and Buffer Zones In 1998, to deal with an increasing concern over
food allergic reactions on planes, the DOT suggested that airlines create
buffer zones. As a result of backlash followed this suggestion, Congress
passed the Department of Transportation and Related Agencies Appro­
priations Act of 200022 which states that no federal funds can be used to
require airlines to provide peanut-free buffer zones or limit the distribution
of peanuts on airlines until a peer-reviewed study could show that peanut
protein circulating in the air could cause harm (Francoeur, 2015). In 2010,
the DOT issued a new proposal to the public in which they offered three
suggestions regarding peanuts on flights:
1. Ban peanuts completely on flights.
2. Ban peanuts on flights with a peanut allergic passenger.
3. Create buffer zones.
The DOT soon backed down from this 2010 proposal when reminded
about the 2000 Appropriations Act. Until the 2000 Appropriations Act is
modified, airlines will be legally allowed to make their own policies regard­
ing food allergy without any instructions from the DOT. As a result, each
20 The contract of carriage is an agreement that passengers automatically enter any time they
purchase a ticket from an airline. The contract of carriage is often either printed in fine print
on the paper ticket or is found on the airline’s website. This agreement limits a passenger’s
right to sue a carrier for damages, and courts have held that this is a binding contract whether
or not a passenger has read it in its entirety.
21 These data can be found on the DOT’s website: https://www.transportation.gov/
airconsumer/2015-report-disability-related-air-travel-complaints-received-2014 (accessed
January 6, 2017).
22 Public Law 69, 106th Cong., 1st sess. (October 9, 1999).

350

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

airline has developed its own policies.23 As examples, some airlines warn
passengers that they are unable to guarantee no nut dust in the air but they
will attempt to accommodate them by not serving nut-containing snacks
when a passenger at risk of an allergic reaction is on board. Some also rec­
ommend that passengers with nut allergies take precautions by flying early
in the day and reading the labels. Other airlines have implemented buffer
zones whereby peanuts are not served within two rows of a passenger with
food allergies.
Food safety policies Airlines, similar to railroads and other transportation
services, are managed under the Interstate Travel Program, which governs
Interstate Conveyance Sanitation and is authorized by the Public Health
Service Act. It is enforced by the FDA, not by the states.24 However, in air­
planes, with the more recent practice of receiving prepackaged food, rather
than preparing food on board, informing the consumers about allergens in
foods is no different than it is in a retail stores. In that way, firms (cater­
ers and commissaries) who provide food for these transportation services
are not subject to FALCPA or the FDA Food Safety Modernization Act25
(FSMA), the federal laws regulating food safety and food allergy labels,
unless they prepared and distributed food that was packaged and sold in
interstate commerce and need to carry a label. As a result, airline menus
(which are typically prepared 1 year in advance) and meals are required to
be labeled for allergens on U.S. carriers, but this requirement is not cur­
rently being enforced. Policies enforcing the labeling of food allergens for
meals served on airplanes are only currently being finalized. The FDA Food
Code (see above and Annex) also applies to airline caterers. Finally, these
U.S. regulations pertain only to flights that depart from the United States
jurisdiction. For example, an U.S. carrier on a flight from Germany to the
United States would not have to comply with FALCPA.
In contrast, European Union Allergen Legislation Regulation No.
1169/2011 on The Provision of Food Information to Consumers,26 which
was published in October 2011 and became effective in December 2014,
requires labeling information for prepacked food to include an ingredients
list, including allergens, and a quantitative indication of ingredients. This
regulation applies “to all foods intended for the final consumer, including
foods delivered by mass caterers” and applies to “catering services provided
by transport undertakings when the departure takes place on the territories
23 See www.dot.gov/airconsumer/nuts-airlines-policies (accessed January 6, 2017).
24 Interstate Conveyance Sanitation. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Part 1250.
25 Public Law 353, 111th Cong., 2d sess. (January 4, 2011).
26 See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A32011R1169 (ac­
cessed July 2, 2016).

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

351

of the Member States to which the Treaties apply.” This regulation also
covers crew food and requires that allergens be labeled on catered and
nonprepacked foods as well. When allergens are present, they must either
be listed on the packaging information or available by asking a crew mem­
ber. If this information is available verbally, it must be indicated on a label
attached to the food, or on a menu, ticket, or label that is readily discern­
ible by an intending purchaser at the place where the intending purchaser
chooses that food (FSA, 2015).
The World Food Safety Guidelines27 from the International Flight Ser­
vices Association has information on allergen labeling and management,
and some airlines may require caterers to report allergens to airline staff
but it is unclear whether this is mandatory or optional guidance.
Policies about medical emergencies training of personnel As already men­
tioned, epinephrine is indicated if a person has an anaphylactic reaction due
to a food allergy. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has required
an emergency medical kit in domestic passenger planes since 1986. Under
the current rule, the kit must contain two single-dose vials of epinephrine
injection (1:1,000 dilution) or the equivalent, and two single-dose vials of
epinephrine injection (1:10,000 dilution) or the equivalent. The 1:10,000
vials are labeled for the treatment of cardiac arrest. However, the 1:1,000
vials, which would be typically used for severe food allergic reactions, are
not labeled specifically for this use. In addition, the FAA does not mandate
that epinephrine auto-injectors be available on board. In response, the
American Academy of Pediatrics is currently advocating the FAA to require
the inclusion of epinephrine auto-injectors in the medical kits on aircrafts
and to work with the FAA on procedures for the use of auto-injectors, rec­
ommendations for doses, and replacement of old medication. In addition,
in July 2015, bipartisan legislation28 was introduced to require the FAA to
initiate rule-making to update the emergency medical kits contents with
appropriate pediatric medications and equipment, including an epinephrine
auto-injector.
Flight attendants and other crew members have first-aid training. How­
ever, the airlines do not mandate that a crew member respond to an emer­
gency, such as anaphylaxis, occurring on a plane. As mentioned above,
they are not allowed to use medical kits (including epinephrine) unless a
doctor is on board or they have received permission from a doctor on the
ground. The Aviation Medical Assistance Act of 199829 protects persons
27 See http://www.ifsanet.com/?page=World_Guidelines (accessed July 2, 2016).
28 Airplane Kids in Transit Safety Act of 2015 or Airplane KITS Act of 2015, HR 3379,
114th Cong., 1st sess. (July 29, 2015).
29 Public Law 170, 105th Cong., 2d sess. (April 24, 1998).

352

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

providing assistance in the case of an in-flight emergency as long as they are
medically qualified. As mentioned above, however, the epinephrine vials in
a plane’s emergency medical kit are not labeled for allergic use and so it is
possible that a person who is unfamiliar with allergy would not know that
epinephrine can and should be used in the case of anaphylaxis.
Another approach to managing emergencies is to divert the plane.
Although pilots have broad discretion to divert an airplane in an emergency,
they have to consider cost (which can range anywhere from $3,000 to
$100,000 [Gendreau and DeJohn, 2002]), proximity to an airport, advice
of medical team, and the ability to land safely. One study analyzed the
records of in-flight emergency calls from five domestic and international
airlines from January 2008 to October 2010. This study found that in total
11,920 in-flight medical emergencies resulted in calls to medical profession­
als on the ground and 265 of these calls were related to an allergic reaction
(Peterson et al., 2013). Of the 265 calls, 12 required aircraft diversion, 40
required transportation to a hospital upon landing, 8 required hospital
admission, and no deaths occurred. The authors did not indicate how many
of these reactions were food-related.
Research on Mitigating Risk
The committee did not find any studies on approaches to mitigate risk
conducted in an airplane setting, although one study, which assessed the
effectiveness of cleaning agents for allergen removal (Perry et al., 2004),
could apply to airlines. The researchers found that on a flat surface such as
a table, dish soap does not remove peanut protein Ara h 1. However, other
cleaners did effectively remove peanut protein Ara h 1 from a table surface.
Soap and water were able to remove Ara h 1 from hands, but hand sanitizer
was not adequate for this purpose. The authors were not able to detect
airborne allergen in a simulated environment, suggesting that the risk from
contact and airborne exposures to peanut protein is very small. Although
the findings were promising, the Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
(ELISA) test used to identify the peanut protein was specific for Ara h 1
protein; other peanut allergenic proteins could have been present but not
detectable. In addition, some detergents and sanitizers can interfere with
ELISA detection of allergen residues, for example, by denaturing the pro­
teins. Therefore, the findings from this study, although interesting, would
need to be re-evaluated under a different study design to ensure that the
ELISA method does not interfere with the results.
Greenhawt et al. studied international in-flight experiences to deter­
mine the efficacy of risk-mitigation behaviors by food-allergic passengers
(Greenhawt et al., 2013). They found that the following contributed to
lower odds of risk of reaction: requesting a buffer zone, requesting an

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

353

announcement to not eat peanut items, request for a peanut-free meal,
wiping tray table, bringing own food, and avoiding airline blanket/pillow.
No association was reported for preboarding; sitting in a particular area;
wiping the seat belt, arm rest, or seat back; or asking the airline to not
distribute snacks containing peanut.
OTHER SETTINGS
Many settings where food is served in any community present health
risks for consumers with food allergies, but only a few are presented in
detail here because of their particular relevance: food service and retail, day
care centers and educational institutions, and air travel (and other modes
of transportation). However, in other settings, food is prepared and served
for specific populations. These include camps, social gatherings, prisons and
jails, military bases, hospitals, and senior homes. The committee did not
explore these settings but, just like other cafeterias, it is reasonable to sug­
gest that they also are considered food establishments under the U.S. Food
Code and therefore should meet its food allergy provisions.
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
In general, tools that can assist in achieving safety in settings of concern
relate to policies (either implemented and enforced by the individual setting
or by federal, state, or local government) combined with precautionary
behaviors from the side of those at risk of having an allergic reaction. In
general, however, only a few federal policies directly or indirectly apply
to food allergies at the settings of concern described in this chapter (e.g.,
a recent federal policy allowing schools to stock epinephrine to manage
severe allergic reactions). For the most part, however, oversight of places
where food is prepared or served is left to the state and local government,
such as the voluntary adoption of the FDA Food Code for food establish­
ments. Unfortunately, many states follow Food Code versions before 2013,
which do not include important provisions relevant for food allergies that
are now in effect.
In regard to individual settings, such as schools or restaurants, studies
showing internal policies, knowledge, and practices to manage food aller­
gies are scarce. The data available would indicate that many improvements
are feasible that would likely contribute to preventing and managing severe
allergic reactions. For example, studies about food service settings suggest
that staff may not have a good understanding of the nuances of food allergy
management or how to prepare a safe meal. The 2013 FDA Food Code sug­
gests the need for awareness and training, but this is not mandated. Only
a few states have laws regarding approaches to food allergy and very few

354

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

mandate training of employees. Training programs are available but have
generally not been grounded in evidence. High employee turnover, varying
education levels, and language barriers represent additional challenges.
Another example of needed improvements that are feasible is in educa­
tional settings. In early care and education and school settings, U.S. Food
Code regulations could be followed. Also, voluntary guidelines exist for
K-12 schools (i.e., the CDC Guideline, FAMPP), and some federal and
state laws are specific to children participating in federal nutrition pro­
grams and those who have an individualized education program (IEP).30
However, gaps in managing food allergies exist. First, because schools are
not reporting in a systematic fashion the occurrence of severe reactions or
the number of children with IEPs due to a food allergy diagnosis, the scope
of the problem in schools is unknown. Second, it is also clear from review­
ing the literature and policies, that schools and other educational settings
do not have sufficient staff trained in first aid and, in particular, in food
allergy anaphylaxis first aid training, which creates a serious problem for
being capable of managing severe food allergy reactions. Finally, the degree
to which states adhere to laws that allow stocking of epinephrine is not
monitored, which hinders the ability to develop best practices and evaluate
their effectiveness.
As children begin to transition into adulthood and may engage in risktaking behaviors, it is critical to have policies in place to help ensure that
their food allergies can be managed. No specific federal or state policies for
higher education campuses directly address food allergies. Several policies,
however, such as the ADA are important for college and university students
and indirectly support food allergy prevention and management.
In all settings where food is prepared or served, most severe reactions
will occur by oral exposure and not from exposure to dust particles. There­
fore, the committee concluded that policies, such as mandating a buffer
zone or prohibiting serving allergens in airplanes or in schools, are not
based on current knowledge. Patients and caregivers can take precautions
to minimize the risk, such as making sure those in charge (e.g., teachers,
restaurant servers, flight crew) are informed about a person’s food allergy,
wiping tray tables, or requesting an allergen-free meal as appropriate.
However, other policies that could be effective at preventing or treating the
rare severe reactions do not exist in those settings of concern. For example,
policies enforcing the labeling of food allergens for meals served on air­
planes are only currently being finalized. Also, although epinephrine vials
30 An individualized education program is a plan that lays out an educational program
designed to meet the needs of a child with special needs. Ideally, it is developed collabora­
tively among the parents and school staff. See http://www.parentcenterhub.org/repository/
iep-overview (accessed January 6, 2017).

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

355

are included in an airplane first aid kit, the availability of epinephrine in a
dose to treat food anaphylaxis is not required. Likewise, medically trained
personnel in these settings need to be able to recognize signs and symptoms
of a severe food allergic reaction and treat with epinephrine.
Policies are not the only approach to food safety. Students in particular,
but also those with risk of food allergy and their caregivers in general, need
to be provided with the information that empowers them to make their
own appropriate decisions about safety. For students, given the nature of
campus life, institutions of higher education have the potential to be key
providers of information about food options and nutrition and available
resources (e.g., dietitians, health care service, or on-campus accommoda­
tions) that can help to meet their food allergy needs. In practice, health
care providers offer food-allergic individuals variable advice about avoid­
ance diets and the need to avoid completely the specific allergenic food(s)
(Turner et al., 2016). Moreover, advice from food allergy advocacy groups,
the Internet, and other sources also may be inconsistent. Therefore, health
care professionals (see Chapter 6), public health authorities (see Chapter
5), and food allergy advocacy groups should be trained to offer consistent,
evidence-based advice on allergen risks, including allergen avoidance diets.
In response to its task, the committee developed specific recommen­
dations for ways to assure that appropriate guidance and education is in
place to create a safe public environment for individuals with food allergy.
In doing so, the committee recognized that its task did not include recom­
mendations for therapeutic intervention or clinical management of food
allergies.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Training Food Industry Personnel
The committee recommends that food industry leaders provide the
necessary resources for integrating food allergy training (e.g., food
allergen identification and preventive controls, effective risk com­
munication with customers) into existing general food safety and
customer service training for employees at all levels and stages in
the food industry, as appropriate, encompassing processing, retail
food and grocery stores, restaurants, and other food service venues.
Training for employees could be offered through, for exam­
ple, supporting conferences, workshops, or webinars to share best
practices related to allergen preventive controls, food allergen risk
communication, and other food allergen safety topics. State health
departments could develop a certification process for allergy aware­

356

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

ness and management in restaurants modeled after the letter grad­
ing system that rates their food safety performance.
Implementing Improved Policies and Practices to
Prevent the Occurrence of Severe Reactions
The committee recommends that all state, local, and tribal gov­
ernmental agencies adopt the 2013 Food and Drug Administration
Food Code, which includes provisions for food establishments on
preventing food allergic reactions. Working in collaboration with
other stakeholders, the agencies also should propose that the next
Food Code requires that the person in charge in food establish­
ments pass an accredited food safety certification program that
includes basic food allergy management in order to decrease or
prevent the risk of food allergen exposure. In addition, agencies
should develop guidance on effective approaches to inform con­
sumers with food allergies in food service establishments.
Guidance on effective approaches to inform consumers with
food allergens in food service establishments could include menu
designations of allergens and posters, and other forms of displaying
information about food allergens in food establishments.
The committee recommends that, within the next year, relevant
federal agencies (e.g., the Food and Drug Administration [FDA],
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], the Federal
Aviation Administration) convene a special task force that includes
participants from the medical community, food companies, and
advocacy stakeholder groups to establish and implement policy
guidelines to:
•
•

•

Assure emergency epinephrine capabilities are in place for chil­
dren and adults in public venues, including schools, early care
and education facilities, and on-board airlines;
Provide standardized food allergy and anaphylaxis first aid
training (e.g., identification of major food allergens, signs and
symptoms of allergic reactions, and emergency treatment pro­
tocols) to appropriate school and university health staff, early
care and education providers, and on-board flight crews; and
Implement education standards for responding to and man­
aging food allergy emergencies in schools and early care and
education facilities (e.g., CDC Food Allergy Guidelines) and on
airlines.

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

357

The committee recommends that the FDA continue to work
together with other relevant federal, state, and local agencies to
develop and implement labeling policies specific to allergenic ingre­
dients in packaged and prepared foods that are distributed through
airlines and other public venues, including schools and early care
and education facilities.
RESEARCH NEEDS
Allergic reactions occur among children attending early care and edu­
cation settings, schools, camps, or college, as well as among children and
adults while traveling or eating at a food establishment and may include
persons without a prior diagnosis. Although anecdotal reports describe
severe reactions, well-documented estimates of such reactions in each set­
ting are not available. Also, although federal and local policies exist, such
as the FDA Food Code, no studies have been conducted on the extent to
which regulatory policies have been implemented and the impact of those
policies on management or prevalence of food allergy.
The obstacles for consumers with food allergy in restaurants, food
establishments, and during travel include lack of communication between
the consumer and staff and lack of knowledge about ensuring safety for
consumers with food allergies. Limited programs exist for education and
more studies are needed to create and validate food allergy educational
materials and programs.
Best practices for managing food allergies in settings of concern where
food is served have not been studied. For example, management plans for
food allergy in early care and education settings, schools, camps, or other
places where children are served food include providing instructions for
safe meals, recognizing and managing reactions, and assigning roles and
responsibilities. These plans require different strategies according to age of
the child, skill level of the supervising adults, and cultural or socioeconomic
context, but these factors have not been extensively studied and a paucity
of data exist upon which to base best practices.
To fill gaps in knowledge in this area, studies should be conducted to
accomplish the following objectives:
•

Monitor the number of food allergic reactions that occur in various
settings where food is served, particularly in early care and educa­
tion settings, schools, camps, and food establishments, and in addi­
tional settings of concern, including restaurants, cafeterias, grocery
stores, and commercial airliners (or other commercial means of
travel).

358

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

•

•

•

•

Monitor the degree to which states adhere to the FDA Food Code
and other laws and regulations with a food allergy component
(e.g., the number of children with IEPs31 due to food allergy) so
that best practices are developed and their effectiveness in the
prevention of severe reactions and management of food allergies is
evaluated.
Define best practices regarding food allergy management (e.g.,
epinephrine storage) at settings where food is served, particularly
in early care and education settings, schools, camps, and food
establishments in additional settings of concern, including restau­
rants, cafeterias, grocery stores, and commercial airliners (or other
commercial means of travel). The experiences of other countries
where management practices have been standardized should be
considered.
Develop and implement evidence-based, effective training programs
for relevant personnel at settings where food is served, particularly
in early care and education settings, schools, camps, and food
establishments in additional settings of concern, including restau­
rants, cafeterias, grocery stores, and commercial airliners (or other
commercial means of travel). The experiences of other countries
where effective training programs have been standardized should
be considered.
Identify and explain risks associated with environmental exposures
to food allergens through skin contact or inhalation.
REFERENCES

AAFA (Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America). 2015. State honor roll 2015. http://www.
aafa.org/page/state-honor-roll.aspx (accessed May 18, 2016).
Ahuja, R., and S. H. Sicherer. 2007. Food-allergy management from the perspective of restau­
rant and food establishment personnel. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 98(4):344-348.
Bailey, S., R. Albardiaz, A. J. Frew, and H. Smith. 2011. Restaurant staff’s knowledge of
anaphylaxis and dietary care of people with allergies. Clin Exp Allergy 41(5):713-717.
Bailey, S., T. Billmeier Kindratt, H. Smith, and D. Reading. 2014. Food allergy training event
for restaurant staff; a pilot evaluation. Clin Transl Allergy 4:26.
Bock, S. A., A. Munoz-Furlong, and H. A. Sampson. 2001. Fatalities due to anaphylactic
reactions to foods. J Allergy Clin Immunol 107(1):191-193.
Bock, S. A., A. Munoz-Furlong, and H. A. Sampson. 2007. Further fatalities caused by
anaphylactic reactions to food, 2001-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 119(4):1016-1018.

31 In public schools, students with a disability may qualify for an IEP, under federal spe­
cial education funding through the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) of
1975, and may receive special education and related services. See more at http://www.food
allergyawareness.org/civil-rights-advocacy/schools-2/individualized_education_program_(iep)­
2/#sthash.F4dKKnbV.dpuf (accessed January 6, 2017).

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

359

Boros, C. A., D. Kay, and M. S. Gold. 2000. Parent reported allergy and anaphylaxis in 4173
South Australian children. J Paediatr Child Health 36(1):36-40.
Brady, W. J., Jr., and H. L. Bright. 1999. Occurrence of multiphasic anaphylaxis during a
transcontinental air flight. Am J Emerg Med 17(7):695-696.
Brough, H. A., K. Makinson, M. Penagos, S. J. Maleki, H. Cheng, A. Douiri, A. C. Stephens,
V. Turcanu, and G. Lack. 2013a. Distribution of peanut protein in the home environ­
ment. J Allergy Clin Immunol 132(3):623-629.
Brough, H. A., A. F. Santos, K. Makinson, M. Penagos, A. C. Stephens, A. Douiri, A. T. Fox,
G. Du Toit, V. Turcanu, and G. Lack. 2013b. Peanut protein in household dust is related
to household peanut consumption and is biologically active. J Allergy Clin Immunol
132(3):630-638.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2013. Voluntary guidelines for managing
food allergies in schools and early care and education programs. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Comstock, S. S., R. DeMera, L. C. Vega, E. J. Boren, S. Deane, L. A. Haapanen, and S. S.
Teuber. 2008. Allergic reactions to peanuts, tree nuts, and seeds aboard commercial
airliners. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 101(1):51-56.
DeSantiago-Cardenas, L., V. Rivkina, S. A. Whyte, B. C. Harvey-Gintoft, B. J. Bunning, and
R. S. Gupta. 2015. Emergency epinephrine use for food allergy reactions in Chicago
Public Schools. Am J Prev Med 48(2):170-173.
DOJ (U.S. Department of Justice). 2012. Justice Department and Lesley University sign agree­
ment to ensure meal plan is inclusive of students with celiac disease and food allergies.
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-and-lesley-university-sign-agreement­
ensure-meal-plan-inclusive-students (accessed July 15, 2016).
FARE (Food Allergy Research & Education). 2016a. Food allergies and restaurants. http://
www.foodallergy.org/advocacy/restaurants (accessed July 3, 2016).
FARE. 2016b. School access to epinephrine map. https://www.foodallergy.org/advocacy/
epinephrine/map (accessed June 28, 2016).
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 2013. Food code 2013. College Park, MD: U.S. Public
Health Service, FDA.
Fleischer, D. M., T. T. Perry, D. Atkins, R. A. Wood, A. W. Burks, S. M. Jones, A. K. Henning,
D. Stablein, H. A. Sampson, and S. H. Sicherer. 2012. Allergic reactions to foods in
preschool-aged children in a prospective observational food allergy study. Pediatrics
130(1):e25-e32.
Francoeur, L. 2015. Flying with food allergies: Concerns and opportunities. Presented at the
Workshop of the Committee on Food Allergies: Global Burden, Causes, Treatment, Pre­
vention, and Public Policy, September 1, 2015, Washington, DC.
FSA (UK Food Standards Agency). 2015. Food allergen labelling and information require­
ments under the EU Food Information for Consumers Regulation No. 1169/2011:
Technical Guidance. http://www.food.gov.uk/sites/default/files/food-allergen-labelling­
technical-guidance.pdf (accessed July 15, 2016).
Furlong, T. J., J. DeSimone, and S. H. Sicherer. 2001. Peanut and tree nut allergic reactions
in restaurants and other food establishments. J Allergy Clin Immunol 108(5):867-870.
Gendreau, M. A., and C. DeJohn. 2002. Responding to medical events during commercial
airline flights. N Engl J Med 346(14):1067-1073.
Gold, M. S., and R. Sainsbury. 2000. First aid anaphylaxis management in children who were
prescribed an epinephrine autoinjector device (EpiPen). J Allergy Clin Immunol 106(1
Pt 1):171-176.
Gonzalez-Mendiola, R., C. Martin-Garcia, J. Carnes, J. Campos, and E. Fernandez-Caldas.
2003. Asthma induced by the inhalation of vapours during the process of boiling rice.
Allergy 58(11):1202-1203.

360

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Greenhawt, M. J., M. S. McMorris, and T. J. Furlong. 2009. Self-reported allergic reactions
to peanut and tree nuts occurring on commercial airlines. J Allergy Clin Immunol
124(3):598-599.
Greenhawt, M., F. MacGillivray, G. Batty, M. Said, and C. Weiss. 2013. International study
of risk-mitigating factors and in-flight allergic reactions to peanut and tree nut. J Allergy
Clin Immunol Pract 1(2):186-194.
Gupta, R. S., V. Rivkina, L. DeSantiago-Cardenas, B. Smith, B. Harvey-Gintoft, and S. A.
Whyte. 2014. Asthma and food allergy management in Chicago Public Schools. Pediat­
rics 134(4):729-736.
Haas, L. 2015. Food allergies in higher education. Presented at the Workshop of the Commit­
tee on Food Allergies: Global Burden, Causes, Treatment, Prevention, and Public Policy,
September 1, 2015, Washington, DC.
Lee, Y. M., and H. Xu. 2015. Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and preparedness among
restaurant managerial staff. J Foodsrv Bus Res 18(5):454-469.
Leitch, I. S., M. J. Walker, and R. Davey. 2005. Food allergy: Gambling your life on a take­
away meal. Int J Environ Health Res 15(2):79-87.
Macdougall, C. F., A. J. Cant, and A. F. Colver. 2002. How dangerous is food allergy in child­
hood? The incidence of severe and fatal allergic reactions across the UK and Ireland. Arch
Dis Child 86(4):236-239.
Mandalbach, K. H., A. Ellsworth, D. M. VanLeeuwen, G. W. Blanch, and H. L. Waters.
2005. Restaurant manager’s knowledge of food allergies: A comparison of differences by
chain and independent affiliation, type of service and size. Journal of Culinary Science
& Technology 4(2-3):63-77.
Martinez Alonso, J. C., A. Callejo Melgosa, M. J. Fuentes Gonzalo, and C. Martin Garcia.
2005. Angioedema induced by inhalation of vapours from cooked white bean in a child.
Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 33(4):228-230.
McIntyre, C. L., A. H. Sheetz, C. R. Carroll, and M. C. Young. 2005. Administration
of epinephrine for life-threatening allergic reactions in school settings. Pediatrics
116(5):1134-1140.
Nowak-Wegrzyn, A., M. K. Conover-Walker, and R. A. Wood. 2001. Food-allergic reactions
in schools and preschools. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 155(7):790-795.
Perry, T. T., M. K. Conover-Walker, A. Pomes, M. D. Chapman, and R. A. Wood. 2004. Dis­
tribution of peanut allergen in the environment. J Allergy Clin Immunol 113(5):973-976.
Peterson, D. C., C. Martin-Gill, F. X. Guyette, A. Z. Tobias, C. E. McCarthy, S. T. Harrington,
T. R. Delbridge, and D. M. Yealy. 2013. Outcomes of medical emergencies on commercial
airline flights. N Engl J Med 368(22):2075-2083.
Rayman, R. B. 2002. Peanut allergy in-flight. Aviat Space Environ Med 73(5):501-502.
Roberts, G., N. Golder, and G. Lack. 2002. Bronchial challenges with aerosolized food in
asthmatic, food-allergic children. Allergy 57(8):713-717.
Sampson, H. A., S. Aceves, S. A. Bock, J. James, S. Jones, D. Lang, K. Nadeau, A. NowakWegrzyn, J. Oppenheimer, T. T. Perry, C. Randolph, S. H. Sicherer, R. A. Simon, B. P.
Vickery, and R. Wood. 2014. Food allergy: A practice parameter update—2014. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 134(5):1016-1025.
Sicherer, S. H., T. J. Furlong, J. DeSimone, and H. A. Sampson. 1999. Self-reported allergic
reactions to peanut on commercial airliners. J Allergy Clin Immunol 104(1):186-189.
Sicherer, S. H., T. J. Furlong, J. DeSimone, and H. A. Sampson. 2001. The US Peanut and
Tree Nut Allergy Registry: Characteristics of reactions in schools and day care. J Pediatr
138(4):560-565.
Simonte, S. J., S. Ma, S. Mofidi, and S. H. Sicherer. 2003. Relevance of casual contact with
peanut butter in children with peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 112(1):180-182.

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

361

Sogut, A., A. B. Kavut, I. Kartal, E. N. Beyhun, A. Cayir, M. Mutlu, and B. Ozkan. 2015.
Food allergy knowledge and attitude of restaurant personnel in Turkey. Int Forum Al­
lergy Rhinol 5(2):157-161.
Turner, P. J., K. J. Allen, S. Mehr, and D. E. Campbell. 2016. Knowledge, practice, and views
on precautionary allergen labeling for the management of patients with IgE-mediated
food allergy—A survey of Australasian and UK health care professionals. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 4(1):165-167.
Umasunthar, T., J. Leonardi-Bee, M. Hodes, P. J. Turner, C. Gore, P. Habibi, J. O. Warner,
and R. J. Boyle. 2013. Incidence of fatal food anaphylaxis in people with food allergy: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Allergy 43(12):1333-1341.
USDA (U.S. Department of Agriculture). 2016. Guide to professional standards for school
nutrition programs. FNS-303.
Versluis, A., A. C. Knulst, A. G. Kruizinga, A. Michelsen, G. F. Houben, J. L. Baumert, and H.
van Os-Medendorp. 2015. Frequency, severity and causes of unexpected allergic reactions
to food: A systematic literature review. Clin Exp Allergy 45(2):347-367.
Vitaliti, G., I. Morselli, V. Di Stefano, A. Lanzafame, M. La Rosa, and S. Leonardi. 2012.
Urticaria and anaphylaxis in a child after inhalation of lentil vapours: A case report and
literature review. Ital J Pediatr 38:71.
Wainstein, B. K., S. Kashef, M. Ziegler, D. Jelley, and J. B. Ziegler. 2007. Frequency and
significance of immediate contact reactions to peanut in peanut-sensitive children. Clin
Exp Allergy 37(6):839-845.

362

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

ANNEX 8: 2013 FOOD CODE (FOOD ALLERGY PROVISIONS)
1.1 Definitions
Major Food Allergen. (1) “Major food allergen” means: (a) Milk, EGG,
FISH (such as bass, flounder, cod, and including crustacean shellfish such as
crab, lobster, or shrimp), tree nuts (such as almonds, pecans, or walnuts),
wheat, peanuts, and soybeans; or (b) A FOOD ingredient that contains
protein derived from a FOOD, as specified in Subparagraph (1)(a) of this
definition. (2) “Major food allergen” does not include (a) Any highly
refined oil derived from a FOOD specified in Subparagraph (1)(a) of this
definition and any ingredient derived from such highly refined oil; or (b)
Any ingredient that is exempt under the petition or notification process
specified in the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of
2004 (Public Law 108-282).
Chapter 2 Management and Personnel
2-1 Supervision
Responsibility
2-101.11 Assignment
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, the PERMIT HOLDER shall
be the PERSON IN CHARGE or shall designate a PERSON IN CHARGE
and shall ensure that a PERSON IN CHARGE is present at the FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT during all hours of operation.
Knowledge
2-102.11 Demonstration
Based on the RISKS inherent to the FOOD operation, during inspections
and upon request the PERSON IN CHARGE shall demonstrate to the
REGULATORY AUTHORITY knowledge of foodborne disease prevention,
application of the HAZARD Analysis and CRITICAL CONTROL POINT
principles, and the requirements of this Code. The PERSON IN CHARGE
shall demonstrate this knowledge by:
(C) Responding correctly to the inspector’s questions as they relate to the
specific FOOD operation. The areas of knowledge include:

MANAGING FOOD ALLERGIES

363

(9) Describing FOODS identified as MAJOR FOOD ALLERGENS and the
symptoms that a MAJOR FOOD ALLERGEN could cause in a sensitive
individual who has an allergic reaction
Duties
2-103.11 Person in Charge*
The PERSON IN CHARGE shall ensure that:
(M) EMPLOYEES are properly trained in FOOD safety, including FOOD
allergy awareness, as it relates to their assigned duties;
Chapter 3 Food
3-6 FOOD IDENTITY, PRESENTATION, AND ON-PREMISES
LABELING
Labeling
3-602.11 Food Labels
(B) Label information shall include:
(5) The name of the FOOD source for each MAJOR FOOD ALLERGEN
contained in the FOOD unless the FOOD source is already part of the com­
mon or usual name of the respective ingredient.
Chapter 4 Equipment, Utensils, and Linens
4-602.11
(A) EQUIPMENT FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES and UTENSILS shall
be cleaned:
(1) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, before each use with a
different type of raw animal FOOD such as beef, FISH, lamb, pork, or
POULTRY;

*“Person in charge” means the individual present at a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT who is
responsible for the operation at the time of inspection.

364

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

(2) Each time there is a change from working with raw FOODS to working
with READY-TO-EAT FOODS;
(3) Between uses with raw fruits and vegetables and with TIME/
TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY FOOD;
(4) Before using or storing a FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING
DEVICE;
(5) At any time during the operation when contamination may have
occurred
(B) Subparagraph (A)(1) of this section does not apply if the FOOD­
CONTACT SURFACE or UTENSIL is in contact with a succession of dif­
ferent types of raw MEAT and POULTRY each requiring a higher cooking
temperature as specified under § 3-401.11 than the previous type.*
* 4-602.11(B) was amended in the 2013 Food Code. It changes the clean­
ing and sanitizing frequency for food contact surfaces or utensils that are
in contact with a raw animal food that is a major food allergen such as
fish, followed by other types of raw animal foods. With this change, the
exception to existing subparagraph (A)(1) found in ¶ (B) now applies only
to raw meat and poultry.
Annex 3 Public Health Reasons/Administrative Guidelines
Restaurant and retail food service managers need to be aware of the seri­
ous nature of food allergies, including allergic reactions, anaphylaxis, and
death; to know the eight major food allergens; to understand food allergen
ingredient identities and labeling; and to avoid cross-contact during food
preparation and service. The 2008 Conference of Food Protection (CFP)
passed Issue 2008-III-006 which provided that food allergy awareness
should be a food safety training duty of the Person in Charge. Accordingly,
the Person in Charge’s Duties under paragraph (M) were amended to assure
the food safety training of employees includes food allergy awareness in
order for them to safely perform duties related to food allergies.

9
Research Needs

This report represents the first review by the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine of the field of food allergy. The com­
mittee’s review identified a broad array of pressing questions that need to be
addressed through new research in order to understand the scope and the
underlying scientific mechanisms of food allergy; improve the management
and treatment of food allergic children and adults and ultimately identify
ways to prevent or cure food allergy; and inform policy and regulatory
decisions concerning food production, labeling, and marketing. The imple­
mentation and vigorous pursuit of such a research agenda will constitute an
important component of charting the “roadmap to safety” needed by the
food allergic community (see Chapter 10). The following research questions
were identified during the work of the committee and are organized to fol­
low the report chapters, rather than according to priorities.
MECHANISMS OF FOOD ALLERGY (CHAPTER 2)
Conducting research related to the mechanistic processes underlying
food allergy is essential in making significant advances to develop better
methods to prevent disease or reduce its severity; predict, diagnose, and
monitor disease; and optimally manage and treat, and ultimately to cure,
food allergy. These mechanistic processes include disease predispositions,
origins and onset, normal and disordered oral tolerance to foods, factors
that contribute to disease severity, and variation in individual responses to
different forms of therapy. In exploring mechanisms of action, including
mechanisms of food allergy etiology, the committee recognizes the value
365

366

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

of animal models. However, a discussion of the benefits and limitations
of using animal models is beyond the scope of this report. The readers are
referred to some excellent reviews on the topic (e.g., Bogh et al., 2016; Van
Gramberg et al., 2013).
One of the most prominent hypotheses for how food allergy develops—
the dual-allergen hypothesis—proposes that environmental exposure to
food allergens through the skin early in life can lead to allergy, while
consumption of these foods during a developmentally appropriate period
early in life results in tolerance. Under this hypothesis, children who avoid
allergens in their diet but are still exposed to them in the environment
might be more likely to develop an allergy than those not exposed. Sup­
porting this hypothesis are data suggesting that early dietary introduction
of peanut products may confer protection against peanut allergy as well as
data suggesting that loss of function of filaggrin, a protein important for
epithelial structure, confers a risk for food sensitization. However, many
questions remain about the mechanisms by which sensitization and toler­
ance occur and about which elements of the immune system represent the
most important contributors to the severity of food allergy or the establish­
ment of tolerance (see Chapter 5). For example, studies have shown that
biochemical indicators of tolerance include a reduction in allergen-specific
immunoglobulin E (IgE) production, decreased allergen-IgE-induced baso­
phil activation, increased allergen-specific IgG4, and induction of T regula­
tory (Treg) cells or anergic T cells. However, some of the data are conflicting
and more studies are needed to better understand the role of these factors
in food allergy.
During the perinatal period, interactions between the developing micro­
biota and the immune system at the cellular and molecular levels are likely
influenced by environmental factors that can, in turn, influence health out­
comes. Although the potential relationships between exposure to microbes
early in life and the onset of food allergies have been explored, specific
changes in the microbial profile of individuals, their particular interactions
with the immune system, and how these interactions might be associated
with food allergy have not been studied in depth.
To fill gaps in knowledge in this area, studies should be conducted to
accomplish the following objectives:
•
•

Elucidate the molecular and cellular mechanisms that account for
the differences between innate tolerance versus food sensitization
and between food sensitization versus food allergy.
Identify the mechanisms, in patients with food allergies, for acquir­
ing tolerance to the offending food allergen, without therapeutic
intervention, as well as for responding to therapeutic interventions

RESEARCH NEEDS

•

•
•

•

367

by developing transient desensitization versus sustained unrespon­
siveness versus true tolerance to the offending food allergens.
Define how particular products and functions of mast cells, baso­
phils, and other effector cells can contribute to the signs and symp­
toms of food allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, and identify
factors that may contribute to individual variation in the patho­
physiological responses to such products.
Study the role of immunoglobulins other than IgE, such as IgG4 or
IgA, and of effector cells in addition to mast cells and basophils, in
modulating (i.e., enhancing or reducing) food allergic responses.
Identify and describe the roles of the skin and intestinal barriers in
protecting individuals from developing food sensitization or a food
allergy, and identify ways in which protective aspects of barrier
function can be enhanced and factors that diminish barrier func­
tion be reduced.
Examine the interactions between the microbiota and the host
immune system that may favor or protect against the development
of a food allergy, and define the extent to which the microbiota
or its products can be manipulated to enhance resistance to the
development of food allergy.

PREVALENCE AND COST OF FOOD ALLERGIES (CHAPTER 3)
One of the committee’s recommendations is to perform well-designed
and adequately powered studies to estimate the true prevalence of food
allergy (see Chapter 3). In addition, the committee concluded that better
methods to collect information about anaphylaxis reactions are needed.
Estimates of the various costs of food allergy are needed as well. For exam­
ple, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has developed tools to
estimate the costs associated with some chronic diseases, such as arthritis.
Medical expenditures for managing food allergy place financial burdens
on society, as well as on the individuals affected and their caregivers.
Additional costs relate to quality of life, productivity in school or at work,
and food recalls. Estimates on cost burden are necessary for prioritizing
research and resources, and for effectively advocating for implementation
of practices and policies that will reduce those costs. These estimates should
include the costs to society, such as those related to health care and produc­
tivity losses due to absenteeism, the costs to families and patients in terms
of lost quality of life, and costs to the food industry due to food recalls.
The following research needs are warranted to improve data on severe
reactions and on cost estimates:

368

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

•

•

Evaluate various methods of collecting national data on food
allergy severe reactions such as by leveraging the existing surveil­
lance systems (e.g., the National Health and Nutrition Examina­
tion Survey or the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System)
or by developing a Web-based reporting system for anaphylaxis in
the community.
Collect and analyze data to estimate the economic and social costs
of food allergy based on current prevalence of both mild and
severe reactions and on objective measures of costs, such as data
on medical expenses and time lost from school and work. Collect
these data on different ethnicities and socioeconomic strata. The
costs to industry due to food recalls and implementation of allergen
control strategies also should be estimated.

RESEARCH ON DIAGNOSIS AND PROGNOSIS (CHAPTER 4)
Diagnosis of food allergy is complex, currently requiring expertise in
assessing the medical history, understanding allergen cross-reactivity, under­
standing eliciting factors that may alter reactivity, selecting and interpreting
imperfect tests, and possibly conducting a medically supervised oral food
challenge (OFC) test. The OFC is currently the best diagnostic test to con­
firm an allergy, but it is time-consuming, expensive, carries risks (e.g., the
risk of triggering an allergic reaction), and is often deferred due to patient
and physician concerns. Therefore, the OFC is underused. In addition,
commonly available simple allergy tests (serum-specific IgE antibody tests
or skin prick tests [SPTs]) have limitations that can result in misdiagnosis,
primarily overdiagnosis, requiring procedures such as OFCs to confirm a
proper diagnosis. For example, currently available, simple diagnostic tests
that are often used to diagnose IgE-mediated food allergies, the serum
food-specific IgE test and the SPT, actually diagnose sensitization, not food
allergy. A variety of diagnostic tests, such as component resolved diagnos­
tics, the basophil activation test, and many others, are emerging or under
study and may better inform diagnosis, prognosis, severity, and threshold.
To fill gaps in knowledge in this area, studies should be conducted to
accomplish the following objectives:
•

Optimize the currently available diagnostic tests and validate meth­
ods, such as OFC (including in special contexts, such as OFC in
infants and young children), as well as pursue additional novel
tests to improve diagnosis, prognosis, determination of severity of
disease, and assessment of antigen thresholds, and to monitor host
responses. These tests will be valuable in assessing the effectiveness
and durability of interventions, such as immunotherapy. These

369

RESEARCH NEEDS

•
•

•

studies should include all affected patient populations (ages, sexes,
ethnicities, comorbidities, socioeconomic strata), should consider
the role of eliciting factors (such as exercise and infections), and
also should be assessed in those circumstances where interventions
are being applied to the patient (immunotherapeutic strategies as
they become available).
Comprehensively examine the utility, cost-effectiveness of, and
barriers to testing, especially regarding the OFC, with a goal of
maximizing the use of appropriate tests.
Examine and assess educational approaches and tools to improve
physician and health care provider education about both the natu­
ral history of food allergies and the appropriate approaches to use
to diagnose food allergies.
Study the utility of emerging technologies in the area of “omics”
methodologies (e.g., genomics, epigenomics, metabolomics). In
particular, identify reliable and clinically useful biomarkers for the
following important goals:
o Assessing the severity of a food allergy (e.g., to identify those
at high risk for anaphylaxis)
o Evaluating and monitoring responses to therapy (e.g.,
immunotherapy)
o Predicting prognosis (e.g., predicting severity)
o Identifying populations at risk of developing a food allergy
so that they can be included when conducting research on
prevention and management strategies and on public health
guidelines
o Diagnosing food allergy in individuals and populations (e.g., for
collecting data on prevalence)
RESEARCH ON RISK DETERMINANTS
AND PREVENTION (CHAPTER 5)
Considerations for Study Designs

Studies on the etiological factors associated with food allergies fre­
quently present methodological flaws due to various reasons, including
lack of accounting for confounding factors (e.g., breastfeeding), use of
inaccurate food allergy measures (e.g., self-reporting), or disregard for the
fact that different populations (e.g., those at high risk of developing a food
allergy) might respond differently to the various risk factors. For example,
due to a variety of differential gene-environment factors (e.g., genetics, epi­
genetics, microbiomes, and other pre- and postnatal environmental factors),
populations will respond differently to interventions. Also, the etiology

370

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

and early life onset of food allergy seems to be multifactorial, and collect­
ing specimen for future analyses would be advantageous. Future research
design on etiological determinants should consider the following:
•
•

•
•

•

•

Conduct longitudinal birth cohort studies that explore the effects
of environmental factors during critical developmental windows (in
utero, infancy, and early childhood) on food allergy.
Couple relevant prenatal, perinatal, and early childhood epidemio­
logical and clinical data with appropriate biospecimen collections
(e.g., serum, cord blood, breast milk) for current and future bio­
marker analyses.
Design studies so that the responses to various exposures of indi­
viduals and populations at high risk and low risk of developing
food allergy can be differentiated.
Use the currently accepted gold standard—double-blind, placebocontrolled OFCs (employing standard dosing protocols and scor­
ing systems, so that the results of various studies can better be
compared)—as the food allergy outcome in research intervention
studies until a simpler reliable method to measure food allergy is
identified and validated.
Account for the potential influence of confounding factors, in addi­
tion to age, sex, and geography, such as breastfeeding, composition
of breast milk, dietary intake, other allergic disorders in the patient
or family history (particularly atopic dermatitis), genetic suscepti­
bility, presence of dogs or cats in the household, number of siblings,
history of antibiotic usage, and exposure to agents or practices that
might impair skin barrier function.
Engage patients or groups representing patients so that research
designs may take into consideration potential socio-psychological,
cultural, and behavioral considerations.
Overall Research Needs

Many genetic and environmental factors could contribute to the onset
of sensitization and to food allergy. For the majority of factors reviewed by
the committee, some, but largely insufficient or inconsistent, evidence exists
at this time about their association with sensitization or food allergy. Nev­
ertheless, health care providers, patients, and their caregivers still need clear
prevention approaches and authoritative and clear public health guidelines.
Therefore, research needs to continue to support or refute the contribution
of these factors to food sensitization or food allergy. The committee recog­
nizes, though, that for other factors direct or indirect evidence is lacking
and research is not currently warranted (e.g., food additives). Although

RESEARCH NEEDS

371

some public health guidelines have been developed to guide practices of
health care providers and individuals, efforts have not been undertaken
to assess the impact of such public health guidelines on practices related
to food allergy and on prevalence of food allergy. Prospective studies
and behavioral research should be conducted to accomplish the following
objectives:
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Examine risk factors for food allergies in all populations (ages,
sexes, ethnicities, comorbidities, socioeconomic strata), especially
in those populations that might have been underrepresented in past
research.
Gain insights about the behaviors of those with (or at risk of)
food allergy and their caregivers as well as about the impact of
public health guidelines on health care providers and individuals’
practices.
Examine the etiology of the rising prevalence of food allergy
within the past two decades, which could identify new targets for
allergy prevention and treatment. For example, what changes have
occurred in food preparation and consumption behavior in com­
munities and what is their potential relationship to the increase
in food allergies? What changes may have occurred in the use
of agents (such as detergents) or practices (such as in personal
hygiene) that might contribute to impaired skin barrier function?
Elucidate, through prospective studies, the role of environmental
factors and gene-environment interactions in the atopic march and
the development of food allergy. For example, do specific factors
increase the risk of an individual progressing from eczema to food
allergy?
Explore potentially unidentified risk factors that may influence
food allergy. For example, although the data available to date have
not shown evidence of a relationship, it is plausible that maternal
and early childhood adiposity and metabolic disorders could be
risk factors for food allergy development.
Using prospective birth cohort studies, evaluate the effects of mul­
tiple early life factors (individually and in combination) and of
possible gene-environmental interactions in the development and
prevention of food allergy in order to inform the design of specific
randomized controlled trials (RCTs).
Identify the best practices to engage patients and their families in
the planning stages of research studies so that patients’ and fami­
lies’ concerns are considered, and assess the value of using these
approaches.

372

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Specific Research Needs
In addition, high-quality prospective studies and RCTs are needed on
specific risk determinants for which some evidence exists about their effect
on food allergy related to the most plausible hypotheses to make mean­
ingful conclusions. These studies should be conducted to accomplish the
following objectives:
The Microbial Hypothesis
•

•

•
•

Determine, using well-designed prospective studies, the role of
mode of birth delivery (vaginal, emergency versus elective cesarean
section) and early life microbiome composition on the development
of food allergy.
Assess, through well-designed prospective studies, potential links
between food allergy and antibiotic exposure in children (studies
should include information on the type, dose, and frequency of
antibiotic exposure).
Determine whether pet ownership is related to food allergy by
using well-designed prospective studies.
Assess, with RCTs, the potential benefits of prebiotics and probiot­
ics to prevent the onset of food allergy.

Allergen Avoidance and Exposure
•

•
•

•

Elucidate the relationship, if any, between breastfeeding and the
onset of food allergy (may also influence through microbiome
modulation) with well-designed prospective studies and take
into account the potential effect of differences in breast milk
composition.
Determine, with RCTs, whether consuming or eliminating or avoid­
ing specific allergenic foods during pregnancy and lactation has any
benefits.
Conduct RCTs, similar to the Learning Early About Peanut study,
to determine whether early introduction of peanut products has
benefit in individuals other than high-risk infants, who were stud­
ied in the original trial.
Examine early introduction of allergenic foods in addition to pea­
nut to determine whether this approach is beneficial in preventing
the development of food allergy.

373

RESEARCH NEEDS

Nutrition Immunomodulation Hypothesis
•

Assess, with RCTs, the potential role of specific nutrients, such as
vitamin D, folate, or fatty acids, in preventing food allergy.
RESEARCH ON HEALTH CARE SETTINGS AND
OTHER SETTINGS (CHAPTERS 6, 7, AND 8)
Health Care Settings

Food allergy management primarily requires avoiding the trigger
allergen(s), but this approach requires extreme care; knowledge of crosscontact, hidden ingredients, and the effect of processing; and knowledge
of ingredients through label reading and other methods. It is prone to
accidents resulting in allergic reactions. Numerous obstacles arise for
food-allergic consumers attempting to obtain safe meals outside the home.
Surveys among individuals with food allergy, caregivers, and health care
providers reveal deficiencies in food allergy knowledge and concerns about
accidents, especially among adolescents and young adults. Only limited pro­
grams are available for educating individuals, caregivers, and health care
providers on strategies to obtain and provide safe meals outside the home,
with few validated programs and limited information on implementation.
In addition, validated, evidence-based dietary guidance is lacking for those
avoiding allergens, such as milk or multiple foods. Knowledge about poten­
tial interventions that health professionals could use to improve individual
psychosocial status, such as to improve quality of life or alleviate anxiety,
also is lacking.
In regard to management, some areas of research need further study.
For example, no means are currently available to reliably predict severity of
anaphylaxis, which would be valuable for health care providers, individuals
with food allergy, and their caregivers. In terms of managing anaphylaxis,
underuse of epinephrine, the primary treatment for anaphylaxis, is common
but the reasons are unknown. In addition, the fixed doses of epinephrine
in auto-injectors may not be appropriate for infants or for individuals
with obesity. Also, medications used as primary and adjunctive therapy for
anaphylaxis (e.g., epinephrine dosing, bronchodilators, antihistamines, cor­
ticosteroids) have not been studied. Standardized emergency plans for indi­
viduals that can be used by caregivers at home or school also do not exist.
To address those gaps in knowledge, the following research areas should
be pursued on all affected populations (ages, sexes, ethnicities, comorbidi­
ties, socioeconomic strata), especially on underrepresented populations:

374

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

•

•

•
•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•

Determine the effectiveness of evidence-based guidelines and
evidence-based educational programs on food allergy management,
including avoidance of allergens and emergency management of
allergic reactions and anaphylaxis, for health care providers and
for patients, particularly for high-risk groups.
Assess the following management issues:
o The effectiveness of approaches other than strict allergen
avoidance
o The role of food allergy in other chronic allergic conditions
o The identification of means to recognize clinically relevant ver­
sus nonrelevant allergen cross-reactivity
Identify risk factors and biomarkers of food-induced anaphylaxis,
particularly to identify individuals at high risk of severe reactions.
Assess the safety and efficacy of adjunctive therapies for anaphylaxis,
especially bronchodilators, antihistamines, and corticosteroids.
Devise safe and effective therapies for food allergy, including those
that can induce long-term desensitization and tolerance (i.e., sus­
tained remission), and ideally a true cure.
Improve understanding of the nutritional needs of persons on food
allergen avoidance diets, how best to determine their need for dieti­
tian evaluation/management, and how to develop evidence-based
medical nutrition therapy.
Evaluate whether consulting with a dietitian or a mental health
professional improves quality of life and understand barriers to
referring patients to dietitians or mental health professionals.
Explore the best means to identify and intervene about psychoso­
cial concerns associated with managing food allergy.
Identify best practices for providing a uniform written emergency
action plan for anaphylaxis. Consider using the recent American
Academy of Pediatrics guidelines as the reference for a best practice
study.
Determine the proper dose of epinephrine in infants less than 10
kg and in individuals with obesity.
Characterize risks associated with nonoral allergen exposures (e.g.,
skin-exposure and inhalation).

Risk Assessment and Factors Affecting Allergic Reactions to Foods
Some allergenic foods have higher potency and cause more severe
reactions than do others. Likewise, evidence indicates that changes in pro­
teins during food processing can contribute to their allergenicity, but these
changes and their effects are not the same for all allergenic proteins. The
relationship between specific protein characteristics (e.g., structure, sensitiv­

RESEARCH NEEDS

375

ity to heat, and digestibility) and specific processing conditions and potency
needs to be elucidated so it can be considered when designing research stud­
ies and when prescribing prevention approaches for individuals.
In addition to age and geographical differences, circumstantial factors
might modify the severity of a food allergy reaction and the level of allergen
needed for a reaction in an individual. The effect of exercise on experienc­
ing a food allergy reaction has been reported and it is well recognized.
However, for other factors, such as alcohol or medication use, biological
cycles, psychological factors, stress, and concomitant allergen exposures,
anecdotes are the main source of information. Identifying the factors that
can modify the severity of allergic reactions and defining their influence on
whether an allergic reaction is experienced upon exposure to a food aller­
gen or in changing the specific eliciting dose are key pieces of information
needed to provide advice to individual patients (see Chapters 6 and 7).
To fill gaps in knowledge in this area, studies should be conducted to
accomplish the following objectives:
•

•
•

Strengthen current knowledge about: food allergen risk assess­
ment and management, including continued assessment of thresh­
old doses for individual allergens; single dose oral challenges for
confirmation of threshold doses; the development, application, and
improvement of parametric dose-distribution modeling approaches
for allergen risk assessment; food consumption patterns of foodallergic populations; and improved methods for detecting allergen
residues in food matrices.
Study the mechanisms that make some food proteins more aller­
genic than others and the effects of food processing methods and
other ingredients on their allergenicity and thresholds.
Study the possible effects of augmentation factors on threshold
doses (e.g., exercise, alcohol) or on modifying the severity of reac­
tions, and the mechanisms underlying such effects.
Managing Food Allergies in Food Establishments,
Food Service, Schools, and When Traveling

Allergic reactions occur among children attending early care and edu­
cation settings, schools, camps, or college, as well as among children and
adults while traveling or eating at a food establishment and may include
persons without a prior diagnosis. Although anecdotal reports describe
severe reactions, well-documented estimates of such reactions in each set­
ting are not available. Also, although federal and local policies exist, such
as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Food Code, no studies have
been conducted on the extent to which regulatory policies have been imple­

376

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

mented and the impact of those policies on management or prevalence of
food allergy.
The obstacles for consumers with food allergy in restaurants, food
establishments, and during travel include lack of communication between
the consumer and staff and lack of knowledge about ensuring safety for
consumers with food allergies. Limited programs exist for education and
more studies are needed to create and validate food allergy educational
materials and programs.
Best practices for managing food allergies in settings of concern where
food is served have not been studied. For example, management plans for
food allergy in early care and education settings, schools, camps, or other
places where children are served food include providing instructions for
safe meals, recognizing and managing reactions, and assigning roles and
responsibilities. These plans require different strategies according to age of
the child, skill level of the supervising adults, and cultural or socioeconomic
context, but these factors have not been extensively studied and a paucity
of data exist upon which to base best practices.
To fill gaps in knowledge in this area, studies should be conducted to
accomplish the following objectives:
•

•

•

Monitor the number of food allergic reactions that occur in various
settings where food is served, particularly in early care and educa­
tion settings, schools, camps, and food establishments, and in addi­
tional settings of concern, including restaurants, cafeterias, grocery
stores, and commercial airliners (or other commercial means of
travel).
Monitor the degree to which states adhere to the FDA Food Code
and other laws and regulations with a food allergy component
(e.g., the number of children with individualized education pro­
grams1 due to food allergy) so that best practices are developed
and their effectiveness in the prevention of severe reactions and
management of food allergies is evaluated.
Define best practices regarding food allergy management (e.g.,
epinephrine storage) at settings where food is served, particularly
in early care and education settings, schools, camps, and food
establishments in additional settings of concern, including restau­
rants, cafeterias, grocery stores, and commercial airliners (or other

1 In public schools, students with a disability may qualify for Individualized Education
Program, under federal special education funding through the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA) of 1975, and may receive special education and related services. See
more at: http://www.foodallergyawareness.org/civil-rights-advocacy/schools-2/individualized_
education_program_(iep)-2/#sthash.F4dKKnbV.dpuf (accessed January 6, 2017).

377

RESEARCH NEEDS

•

•

commercial means of travel). The experiences of other countries
where management practices have been standardized should be
considered.
Develop and implement evidence-based, effective training programs
for relevant personnel at settings where food is served particularly
in early care and education settings, schools, camps, and food
establishments in additional settings of concern, including restau­
rants, cafeterias, grocery stores, and commercial airliners (or other
commercial means of travel). The experiences of other countries
where effective training programs have been standardized should
be considered.
Identify and explain risks associated with environmental exposures
to food allergens through skin contact or inhalation.
REFERENCES

Bogh, K. L., J. van Bilsen, R. Glogowski, I. Lopez-Exposito, G. Bouchaud, C. Blanchard, M.
Bodinier, J. Smit, R. Pieters, S. Bastiaan-Net, N. de Wit, E. Untersmayr, K. Adel-Patient,
L. Knippels, M. M. Epstein, M. Noti, U. C. Nygaard, I. Kimber, K. Verhoeckx, and L.
O’Mahony. 2016. Current challenges facing the assessment of the allergenic capacity of
food allergens in animal models. Clin Transl Allergy 6:21.
Van Gramberg, J. L., M. J. de Veer, R. E. O’Hehir, E. N. Meeusen, and R. J. Bischof. 2013.
Use of animal models to investigate major allergens associated with food allergy. J Al­
lergy (Cairo) 2013:635695.

10
Final Comments: A Roadmap to Safety

Food allergy is an important chronic disease that can occur in any age
group but mainly affects infants and children, some of our most vulnerable
populations. For individuals with food allergy and caregivers, food allergy
has effects that extend beyond health to quality of life. Food allergy can
be life threatening. It has been estimated to cost an overall $24.8 billion
annually, including direct medical costs and other costs borne by the family
(Gupta et al., 2013). Despite these concerns and general awareness among
some in the public, the nation as a whole has not yet devoted adequate
resources and efforts to address this important chronic disease.
As explained in Chapter 1, the committee was not charged with devel­
oping clinical guidelines but, where appropriate, it states its support for
clinical guidelines and recommends that health care providers follow guide­
lines as they are updated with scientific evidence. The committee was
tasked with the following: developing a framework for future directions
in understanding food allergy and its impact on individuals, families, and
communities; recommending steps to increase public awareness of food
allergy; promoting research on both disease causation and management;
and informing preventive approaches to food allergy. In their deliberations
and recommendations, the committee greatly benefited from information
gathered during public sessions, and it is particularly grateful to the advi­
sory panel that so generously came to public meetings and provided their
unique perspectives and expectations. Although obviously a cure for food
allergies will not result from a scientific report, this committee hopes that
its recommendations will generate the ideas and incentives to promote the
research needed for an eventual cure. Until that happens, many policies,
379

380

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

practices, and behaviors could be changed to substantially improve food
safety, which would enhance the health and quality of life of individu­
als with food allergy and their caregivers and save lives. The committee’s
review of information in leading journals and through the public sessions
has underscored the conclusion that solutions are not the responsibility
of individuals with food allergy and their caregivers alone. Solutions to
food allergy and a roadmap to greater safety will emerge from the efforts
of many stakeholders working collaboratively toward the same unifying
goal of managing food allergies, and, ultimately, developing safe, effective
therapies.
IMPLICATIONS OF AN ECOLOGICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL MODEL
In its consideration of the evidence and recommendations for a roadmap to greater safety, the committee adopted an ecological-developmental
perspective (see Figure 10-1). This approach had multiple implications for
the work of the committee in delineating the issues, organizing the evidence,
drawing conclusions, and making recommendations, and for multifaceted
efforts to communicate their conclusions. This perspective underscores the
importance of a multidisciplinary and multisystem approach to evaluating
the evidence and forming recommendations, calling on the viewpoints of
experts and stakeholders representing a range of ecological contexts.
An ecological-developmental model highlights the importance of devel­
opmental timing, both for exposures and also for safety planning. The
committee considered distinct issues focused on the different developmental
periods—prenatal, infancy, early childhood, primary school-age, adoles­
cence, adulthood, and older years. The nature of the human organism
changes during each of these periods of development, affecting vulnerability
to food allergy (see Chapter 5). The nature of the food context changes
as well, for an individual does not control his or her food intake during
the very early stages of life. Choices by parents and caregivers, as well as
the quality and type of food available will be crucial. Later on in develop­
ment, children not only will have more choices in what they eat and be less
influenced by the restrictions posed on them earlier in life. They also will
be more influenced by contexts outside the family, including peers, schools,
social media, and mass media (see Chapter 8). The roles of families and
schools also are influenced by the food industry, dietary recommendations
by health care providers and informal “experts,” as well as by policies
about food allergy from the community, culture, or government. Thus,
in prenatal development and early life, key contexts for addressing food
allergy include the immediate prenatal environment of the mother, caregiv­
ing, home, and early care and education settings, and the larger contextual
environments comprising health care provider advice, policies for food

FINAL COMMENTS: A ROADMAP TO SAFETY

381

FIGURE 10-1 Ecological-developmental model for food allergies. Different systems
that an individual interacts with are depicted as proximal (e.g., food, biophysical
environment) and distal (e.g., industry, government).
NOTES: Industry practices refers to all the manufacturing processes and allergen
control plans followed during food production, distribution, preparation or cook­
ing, and serving. They also refer to mandatory and voluntary labeling of food al­
lergens and to recall procedures followed when a product is contaminated with a
food allergen. Cultural and societal practices refer to the particular diets and foods
of regions and countries. Biophysical environment refers to the external proximal
environment (e.g., air) while Individual refers to all systems internal to a develop­
ing human, including genome, epigenome, proteome, metabolome, central nervous
system, immune system, microbiomes, and many other self-regulatory systems in­
volved in adaptation and sustaining life. Health care providers include the persons
(e.g., physicians, dieticians) and the institutions that protect individual and public
health. Child care, school, work includes all proximal settings that interact with
an individual at different life stages. Finally, family, home refers to the system of
people, relationships, routines, and practices occurring at home. Interactions (e.g.,
communication, physical contact) occur between and among all those systems and
the individual to support (or not) food safety.

382

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

allergy safety in early care and education settings, the food industry, and
societal policies. Later in life, individuals need knowledge and skills to
make their own choices pertinent to food allergy in the broad contexts of
everyday life, including schools, workplaces, playgrounds and recreational
settings, restaurants, and transportation systems (Chapters 7 and 8).
THE ROADMAP TO SAFETY
Although it is not yet possible to prevent the onset of food allergy
(due to lack of a clear understanding of all the relevant genetic and envi­
ronmental factors) or completely prevent food allergic reactions, multiple
improvements could be achieved in the short term with relatively small
feasible actions.
The committee conceptualized the answers to the statement of task
as articulating a roadmap to safety with key actions (see Figure 10-2). In
mapping the road to greater public safety regarding food allergy, it is essen­
tial to recognize the roles of multiple systems (and their actors within) at
multiple organizational levels in private and public life and their complex
interactions, as depicted in Figure 10-1. The committee selected specific
settings (and their interactions with others, such as governments or health
providers) for their relevance to safety in food allergy: food establishments,
early care and education settings, schools, higher education, and the travel
industry. In its review, the committee found deficiencies in existing practices
or policies in these various settings. Likewise, lack of information or misin­
formation among the general public and even individuals with food allergy
themselves need to be amended. Presentations from the advisory panel to
the committee and published statements from individuals with food allergy
or their caregivers (see Chapter 1) corroborate the committee’s findings
related to these deficiencies.
The committee’s roadmap to safety consists of a multifaceted undertak­
ing that involves the effort of many stakeholders in the different arenas and
includes the following actions: (1) obtain accurate prevalence estimates,
(2) use proper diagnostic methods and provide evidence-based health care,
(3) identify evidence-based prevention approaches, (4) improve education
and training of all stakeholders, including health care providers, individu­
als with food allergy, caregivers, food industry leaders and employers, and
others, (5) implement improved policies and practices that prevent and
treat severe reactions, and (6) expand research programs related to better
diagnostics, effective management and prevention practices, including food
allergy therapies and attempts to devise a cure.
The first major action on the road to greater safety is collecting bet­
ter information about prevalence. Reliable data on the prevalence of food
allergy are crucial to inform further advances in food allergy safety and also

FIGURE 10-2 Roadmap to food allergy safety in six actions.
*Research is needed to achieve all other actions and to reach the short- and long-term goals (see Chapter 9 for all specific areas of
research). The actors represent the primary stakeholders that will be involved in implementing the actions.

383

384

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

to prioritize food allergies in the context of other public health diseases.
Prevalence data also are crucial to define the major allergens and to explore
risk factors that might differentially affect specific populations. With this in
mind, the committee has recommended collecting food allergy prevalence
data in a systematic manner.
The second major action on the road to safety is improving the quality
of diagnosis and providing evidence-based health care. As recently articu­
lated by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
report Improving Diagnosis in Health Care (NASEM, 2015), getting the
right diagnosis is a key aspect of health care, informing all subsequent health
care decisions. That report recognizes that “diagnostic errors can lead to
negative health outcomes, psychological distress, and financial costs” and
possibly inappropriate or unnecessary treatment (NASEM, 2015, p. 19). In
the context of food allergy, proper diagnosis is a challenging activity. It is,
however, particularly important given the many misunderstandings about
food allergy and the consequences, including death, of a misdiagnosis.
Therefore, the committee recommends proper use of current diagnostic
methods and identification of better methods in the future.
The third action is defining evidence-based prevention approaches.
Many hypotheses have been proposed to explain food allergy etiology (e.g.,
microbial hypothesis, dual-exposure hypothesis) but none is confirmed
yet. Because of their importance in designing prevention approaches, par­
ticularly for individuals who carry a genetic predisposition, the committee
concluded that understanding the risk determinants is another important
element of the road to safety. In this regard, the committee recommends
that guidelines be updated with emerging scientific findings. Also, recogniz­
ing the weaknesses in current studies and the inconsistencies in findings, the
committee outlined research needs related to specific risk determinants and
made recommendations for improving study designs, including expanding
study participant populations to include all ages, ethnicities, and socioeco­
nomic strata.
The fourth action to greater safety, the committee concluded, is
improved education and training of all stakeholders, including health care
providers, industry leaders, and employers as appropriate, in recognizing
and managing the disease and/or preventing severe reactions. On the one
hand, public health and clinical guidelines already exist on how to diag­
nose, prevent, and manage food allergy (e.g., Guidelines supported by the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the National Insti­
tutes of Health and published by the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma
& Immunology). These Guidelines should continue to be updated as new
information emerges. The Guidelines are not only meant for all health care
providers but also include valuable information for individuals with food
allergy and their caregivers as they attempt to manage food allergy in their

FINAL COMMENTS: A ROADMAP TO SAFETY

385

homes and various settings. Updating the Guidelines as soon as relevant
information emerges is an essential action to prevent and treat reactions.
On the other hand, little information is available on the extent to which
these evidence-based clinical and public health guidelines are used by health
care providers and others. In this digital age, consumers rely on sources of
information other that the health care providers, augmenting the possibili­
ties for misunderstanding about a chronic disease for which fundamental
data are still emerging. For this reason, it becomes even more important
that advice from the health care providers is clear and consistent and based
on the most current scientific findings.
Guidelines also are essential for other stakeholders. For example, exist­
ing government-led guidelines for early care and education centers and
schools (e.g., CDC, 2013) provide excellent starting points for preventing
allergic reactions in those settings. Likewise, industry-led guidelines for
the food manufacturing (GMA, 2009) or food retail (FMI, 2016) industry
as well as training curricula (NRA, 2016) for food service establishments
have been developed. Although the committee did not review these food
industry guidelines, such guidelines, when complete and scientifically based,
can assist industry personnel in understanding food allergy, controlling food
allergen cross-contact contamination, and communicating with consumers
about their allergies and potential risks. The guidelines for early care and
education programs and schools or for the food industry represent best cur­
rent practices and were developed based on the sound judgement of experts
and current scientific knowledge. They are a key component for minimizing
risks in settings of concern.
Training in food allergy and appropriate preventive emergency response
actions is another critical action to this component of the roadmap to
safety. When severe food allergy reactions occur due to accidents, insuf­
ficient or inappropriate responses can lead to unnecessary loss of lives. It is
well known among the medical community that epinephrine is a safe, ade­
quate treatment for anaphylaxis. However, epinephrine is not always used
due to lack of availability, lack of knowledge about on how to administer,
or unfounded safety concerns. More extensive emergency training is needed
for many more in the community. It is obvious, that although it will not be
possible to prevent all severe food allergy reactions for all individuals, much
more could be done to decrease the current burden. Overall, the commit­
tee concluded that a fundamental need exists to train many stakeholders
(e.g., health care providers, industry, consumers at risk, and ultimately the
general public) on how to prevent and treat severe food allergy reactions.
The fifth important action is to develop and implement policies and
related practices that help to prevent and to properly treat severe reactions.
Among them, improved labeling is highlighted by the committee as a key
action not only to improve risk communication and safety for consumers,

386

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

but also to assist the food industry with applying a labeling system for
food products that is based on risk. The implementation of the manda­
tory labeling rule Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act
of 2004 and the 2013 Food and Drug Administration Food Code, which
provides advice from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for uniform
systems and practices that address the safety of food sold in food establish­
ments, serves to protect the consumer from severe reactions. Yet, in other
important areas, such as preventing the possibility of cross-contamination
during food processing, no regulation has been enacted that aims to pro­
tect consumers by providing them with information about potential risks.
The current voluntary labeling of packaged foods that warns consumers of
potential contamination (e.g., “may contain X”) has resulted only in confu­
sion for consumers and industry alike and bears no relationship to risk. In
this regard, the committee recommends that the food industry and federal
government work together toward a risk-based labeling system. Adoption
of the FDA Food Code by all states is another important policy recommen­
dation. The 2013 FDA Food Code includes provisions on preventing food
allergic reactions but it has not been adopted by all states.
Additional policies highlighted by the committee focus on safety at
settings of concern such as early care and education centers and school
settings, from early childhood preschool through college or university. The
committee recognized the need to ensure that appropriate guidance and
education is in place to create a safe public environment for individuals
with food allergy. To that effect, the committee recommends that relevant
federal agencies (e.g., the FDA, the Centers for Disease Control and Preven­
tion, the Federal Aviation Administration) convene a special task force to
establish and implement policy guidelines.
Finally and critical to future improvements in food allergy safety, the
committee has identified a list of research priorities as the sixth action in
the road to safety. Key questions about diagnostics, mechanisms, risk deter­
minants, and management require greater research efforts. The committee
recommends priorities for research based on those that showed promise for
advancing and refining management approaches, including the development
of safe and effective therapies and, ultimately, a cure.
As a whole, this report, including its conclusions and recommenda­
tions, is intended to provide a roadmap to greater safety for individuals
with food allergy, for stakeholders at multiple levels, in families, com­
munities, industries, and the nation as a whole. Although more research is
needed, the committee concluded that sufficient evidence is available now to
guide these stakeholders to make changes and take actions toward greater
safety that will improve the health and quality of life of many individuals
with food allergy, and all those who have a stake in their health and well­
being. In general, stakeholders in charge of implementing recommendations

FINAL COMMENTS: A ROADMAP TO SAFETY

387

should consider the experiences of other countries where management
practices (e.g., training of stakeholders or developing anaphylaxis plans)
have been standardized.
REFERENCES
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2013. Voluntary guidelines for managing
food allergies in schools and early care and education programs. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
FMI (Food Marketing Institute). 2016. Retail allergen resouce document. Arlington, VA: FMI.
GMA (Grocery Manufacturers Association). 2009. Managing allergens in food processing
establishments. Washington, DC: Grocery Manufacturers Association.
Gupta, R., D. Holdford, L. Bilaver, A. Dyer, J. L. Holl, and D. Meltzer. 2013. The economic
impact of childhood food allergy in the United States. JAMA Pediatr 167(11):1026-1031.
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine). 2015. Improving
diagnosis in health care. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
NRA (National Restaurant Association). 2016. ServSafe. http://www.servsafe.com/allergens
(accessed August 30, 2016).

Appendix A
Open Session Agendas

The committee held data-gathering sessions that were open to the
public in Washington, DC, on June 22, 2015, and August 31-September 1,
2015. The open session agendas for the public meetings and a workshop
are presented below:
Committee on Food Allergies: Global Burden, Causes,
Treatment, Prevention, and Public Policy
Keck Center of the National Academies
500 Fifth Street NW, Washington, DC
Room 201
MONDAY, JUNE 22, 2015
OPEN SESSION
11:30-11:35 a.m.

Welcome and Introductions
Virginia Stallings and Committee

389

390

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

11:35 a.m.­
12:30 p.m.

Sponsor Perspectives on the Study
Mary Jane Marchisotto, Food Allergy Research
& Education
Stefano Luccioli & Patricia Hansen, Center for
Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and
Drug Administration
Daniel Rotrosen, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health
Charlsia Fortner, Food and Nutrition Service,
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Bob Parker, National Peanut Board

12:30-1:30

Lunch Break
Cafeteria on the Third Floor

1:30-2:30

Sponsor Perspectives on the Study
Tia Rains, Egg Nutrition Center
Barbara Blakistone, National Fisheries Institute
Ari Mayer Mackler, International Tree Nut
Council Nutrition Research & Education
Jill Nicholls, National Dairy Council
Alison Kretser, International Life Sciences
Institute North America
Meryl Bloomrosen, Asthma and Allergy
Foundation of America

2:30-3:00

Questions from the Committee

3:00-3:15

Break

3:15-3:30

Discussion with Advisory Panel
Bryan Bunning
Monika Biller Harris
Dan Cicero
Karen Hemmerdinger
Jill Mindlin
Caroline Moassessi
Karin Tegila

3:30 p.m.

End of Open Session

391

APPENDIX A

Committee on Food Allergies: Global Burden, Causes,
Treatment, Prevention, and Public Policy
Public Workshop
August 31-September 1, 2015
Keck Center of the National Academies
500 Fifth Street NW, Washington, DC
Room 100

Workshop Goals
•
•
•
•
•

Review current knowledge, research, and trends in food allergy
Explore strategies for understanding, measuring, preventing,
and diagnosing food allergy
Identify public settings of concern for individuals with food
allergy
Evaluate approaches to address the unique needs and chal­
lenges of individuals with food allergy
Discuss existing food allergy legislation and regulatory issues

MONDAY, AUGUST 31, 2015
12:15-12:40 p.m.

Registration and Check-In

12:40-12:45

Welcome Remarks
Virginia Stallings, Committee Chair

Session I: Context, Basic Mechanisms, and Diagnostics
Moderator: Stephen Galli
12:45-1:05

Food Allergies in Socioecological Contexts of
Human Adaptation and Development
Ann Masten, University of Minnesota

1:05-1:35

Mechanisms of Food Allergy
Wayne Shreffler, Massachusetts General Hospital

392

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

1:35-1:55

Cellular and Molecular Diagnostics and Prognostics
in Food Allergy
Kari Nadeau, Stanford University School of Medicine

1:55-2:10

Panel Discussion
Session II: Early Determinants of Food Allergy
Moderator: Anna Maria Siega-Riz

2:10-2:30

Genetic and Epigenetics Effects for Allergy-Related
Diseases and Traits
Liming Liang, Harvard School of Public Health

2:30-2:50

Infant Gut Microbial Markers of Food Sensitization
at Age 1
Anita Kozyrskyj, Pediatrics, University of Alberta

2:50-3:10

Nutritional and Lifestyle Early Life Determinants
Katie Allen, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute

3:10-3:30

Panel Discussions

3:30-3:50

Break

Session III: Prevention and Urgent Care of Food Allergy
Moderator: Hugh Sampson
3:50-4:25

Food Allergy Prevention (Peanuts)
Gideon Lack, King’s College London/St. Thomas’
Hospital

4:25-4:45

Research on Early Introduction of Hen’s Egg and
Cow’s Milk
Johanna Bellach, Charité Hospital, University of
Berlin

4:45-5:05

Emergency Anaphylaxis Management:
Opportunities for Improvement
Ronna Campbell, Mayo Clinic

5:05-5:25

Panel Discussion

5:25 p.m.

Adjourn

393

APPENDIX A

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 2015
7:30-7:55 a.m.

Coffee, Tea, and Juice Served

7:55-8:00

Welcome Remarks
Virginia Stallings, Committee Chair
Session IV: International Perspectives
Moderator: Virginia Stallings

8:00-8:25

Food Allergy in Japan
Motohiro Ebisawa, World Allergy Organization/
Sagamihara National Hospital

8:25-8:50

Management of Food Allergy in Europe—an
Overview Using Germany as an Example
Johanna Bellach, Charité University Hospital Berlin

8:50-9:15

Food Allergies in Australia/Food Advisory Labeling
Katie Allen, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute

9:15-9:35

Break
Session V: Patient-Centered Concerns
Moderator: Scott Sicherer

9:35-9:55

Reimbursement/Insurance
Paul Campbell, Amplify Public Affairs

9:55-10:15

Causes, Treatment, Prevention, and Public Policy: A
Psychological Perspective on Food Allergy
Audrey DunnGalvin, University College Cork

10:15-10:35

Primary Care Management of Food Allergy and
General Public Knowledge and Beliefs
Ruchi Gupta, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine; Ann & Robert H. Lurie
Children’s Hospital of Chicago

10:35-10:55

Challenges in Managing Food Allergy in Vulnerable
Groups
Hemant Sharma, Children’s National Medical Center

394

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

10:55-11:25

Dietary Intake and Nutritional Status
Marion Groetch, Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

11:25-11:55

Panel Discussion

11:55 a.m­
12:55 p.m.

Lunch
Cafeteria on Third Floor

Session VI: Food Industry and Regulatory Environment
Moderator: Stephen Taylor
12:55-1:15

Bioguided Food Processing
Bruce German, University of California

1:15-1:35

State and National Policymaking on Food Allergies:
Changes Sweeping (some of) the Nation
Lynn Morrison, Washington Health Advocates

1:35-1:55

Assessing Risks of Exposure to Allergens from
Foods
Joe Baumert, University of Nebraska

1:55-2:15

The Allergen Journey: Developing Best Practice
Solutions for Industry
Sue Estes, Pepsico

2:15-2:45

Practical Regulatory Issues
Steven Gendel, IEH Laboratories and Consulting
Group

2:45-3:15

Panel Discussion

3:15-3:30

Break
Session VII: Public Settings of Concern
Moderator: Wesley Burks

3:30-3:50

Food Allergy Management in the School Setting
Sally Schoessler, Allergy and Asthma Network

3:50-4:10

Food Allergies in Higher Education

395

APPENDIX A

Lindsay Haas, University of Michigan
4:10-4:30

Food Allergies: Bridging the Accommodation Gap
in Food Service
David Crownover, National Restaurant Association

4:30-4:50

Food Marketing/Retail
Hilary Thesmar, Food Marketing Institute

4:50-5:10

Flying with Food Allergies: Concerns and
Opportunities
Laurel Francoeur, Attorney and Food Allergy
Advocate

5:10-5:40

Panel Discussion

5:40-6:00

Public Comment
Karin Teglia
Bryan Bunning
Lianne Mandelbaum
Kristen Spotz
Rachel Clark
Scott Riccio
Meryl Bloomrosen

6:00 p.m.

Closing Remarks and Adjourn
Virginia Stallings

Appendix B
Food Allergy Prevalence
Literature Search Strategy

Two literature searches were conducted to assess the current preva­
lence of food allergy both nationally and internationally, including overall
population prevalence, food-induced anaphylaxis, and the prevalence of
allergy to specific foods. The searches were conducted in the online data­
bases Medline and EMBASE and were not limited by country. Peanut,
nut, milk, wheat, egg, soy, fish, shellfish, and sesame were included in the
initial search. An additional search was conducted that included the pre­
vious foods as well as specific types of fish (tuna, salmon, cod), molluscs
(clams), nuts (almond, macadamia nut, Brazil nut, pecan, cashew, pine nut,
chestnut, pistachio, hazelnut, walnut), seeds (sesame, mustard, sunflower,
poppy, pumpkin), coconut, litchi, lupin, fruits, and vegetables. Articles
were excluded if they were written in a language other than English, had
nonhuman subjects, or were case studies/series, notes, conference abstracts,
nonsystematic reviews, or opinion pieces. The searches yielded 767 undu­
plicated articles. The abstracts of these articles were then screened for
food allergy or anaphylaxis population prevalence estimates. Of these, 707
articles did not provide an estimate and were excluded, leaving 60 articles
for full text review. These were supplemented by 13 articles suggested by
committee members or found through reference mining. This process is
illustrated in Figure B-1, and the search terms used are listed in Tables B-1
and B-2. A summary of studies that reported prevalence of food allergy is
found in Table B-3. Summary tables of systematic reviews on the prevalence
of food allergy are found in Table B-4.

397

398

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Citations identified in Medline and
EMBASE published between January
a
2010 and September 2015
(n=367)

Supplemental search for inclusion of additional
allergens: Citations identified in Medline and
EMBASE published between January 2012 and
b
September 2015
(n=555)

Duplicate citations across
databases removed
(n=155)

Additional citations identified
from reference mining or from
the committee members
(n=13)
Unduplicated citations
(n=767)

Retrieved articles for abstract and
full-text screening
(n=780)
Excluded articles that failed to
c
meet eligibility criteria
(n=707)

Articles included
(n=73)

FIGURE B-1 Literature search and selection process.
a Search was designed to capture studies measuring the prevalence of food allergy
and anaphylaxis to peanut, nut, milk, wheat, egg, soy, fish, shellfish, or sesame, and
was not limited by country.
b Supplemental search was designed to capture studies measuring the prevalence
of food allergy and anaphylaxis to additional allergens not included in initial search
(see text for complete list) and was not limited by country.
c Articles were excluded if they did not give food allergy or anaphylaxis popula­
tion prevalence estimates.

399

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-1 Search Terms to Identify Relevant Literature on Global
Prevalence of Food Allergy for Medline and EMBASE
Search Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Search Terms
a. Medline Search
Food hypersensitivity/
Peanut hypersensitivity/
Nut hypersensitivity/
Milk hypersensitivity/
Wheat hypersensitivity/
Egg hypersensitivity/
Soybean allergy.mp
Soy allergy.mp
Fish allergy.mp
Shellfish allergy.mp
Sesame allergy.mp
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
Prevalence/
Anaphylaxis/
Life threatening food allergy.mp
13 or 14 or 15
12 and 16
b. EMBASE Search
Food allergy/
Food allergen/
Peanut allergy/
Nut allergy/
Milk allergy/
Wheat allergy/
Egg allergy/
Soy allergy.mp
Soybean allergy.mp
Fish allergy.mp
Shellfish allergy.mp
Sesame allergy.mp
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
or 12
Prevalence/
Anaphylaxis/
Food allergy prevalence.mp
Life threatening food allergy.mp
14 or 15 or 16 or 17
13 and 18

NOTES: Search terms were mapped to Subject Headings when available; otherwise searched
as Keyword (.mp). Searches limited to 2010 to Current.

400

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-2 Search Terms to Identify Relevant Literature on Global
Prevalence of Food Allergy to Additional Allergens for Medline and
EMBASE
Search Numbers

Search Terms
a. Medline

1

Prevalence/

2

limit 1 to (English language and humans and yr=“2012 -Current”)

3

Incidence/

4

limit 3 to (English language and humans and yr=“2012 -Current”)

5

Hypersensitivity/

6

limit 5 to (English language and humans and yr=“2012 -Current”)

7

Food Hypersensitivity/

8

limit 7 to (English language and humans and yr=“2012 -Current”)

9

Skin Tests/

10

Immunoglobulin E/

11

2 or 4

12

6 or 8 or 9 or 10

13

11 and 12

14

Milk/

15

13 and 14

16

Egg Hypersensitivity/

17

13 and 16

18

Milk Hypersensitivity/

19

13 and 18

20

Fishes/

21

Tuna/

22

Salmon/

23

Gadiformes/

24

20 or 21 or 22 or 23

25

13 and 24

26

Nut Hypersensitivity/

27

Prunus/

28

Macadamia/

29

Bertholletia/

30

Carya/

401

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-2 Continued
Search Numbers

Search Terms

31

Anacardium/

32

Nuts/

33

Pistacia/

34

Corylus/

35

Juglans/

36

pine nut.mp.

37

chestnut.mp.

38

26 or 27 or 28 or 29 or 30 or 31 or 32 or 33 or 34 or 35 or 36 or
37

39

13 and 38

40

Peanut Hypersensitivity/

41

13 and 40

42

Wheat Hypersensitivity/

43

13 and 42

44

Soybeans/

45

13 and 44

46

Seeds/

47

Sesamum/

48

Mustard Plant/

49

Helianthus/

50

Papaver/

51

Cucurbita/

52

46 or 47 or 48 or 49 or 50 or 51

53

13 and 52

54

Cocos/

55

13 and 54

56

Litchi/

57

13 and 56

58

Lupinus/

59

13 and 58

60

Fruit/

61

Vegetables/

62

Fragaria/
continued

402

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-2 Continued
Search Numbers

Search Terms

63

60 or 61 or 62

64

13 and 63

65

Mollusca/

66

Bivalvia/

67

65 or 66

68

13 and 67
Results from 15, 17, 19, 25, 39, 41, 43, 45, 53, 55, 57, 59, 64, and
68 combined
b. EMBASE Search

1

Prevalence/

2

limit 1 to (human and English language and yr=“2012 -Current”)

3

incidence/

4

limit 3 to (human and English language and yr=“2012 -Current”)

5

hypersensitivity/

6

limit 5 to (human and English language and yr=“2012 -Current”)

7

food allergy/

8

limit 7 to (human and English language and yr=“2012 -Current”)

9

skin test/

10

immunoglobulin E/

11

2 or 4

12

6 or 8 or 9 or 10

13

11 and 12

14

milk allergy/

15

egg allergy/

16

fish/

17

salmon/

18

tuna/

19

Atlantic cod/

20

Crustacea/

21

shellfish/

22

shrimp/

23

lobster/

24

crab/

25

mollusc/

403

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-2 Continued
Search Numbers

Search Terms

26

clam/

27

nut allergy/

28

almond/

29

Macadamia/

30

Brazil nut/

31

pecan/

32

cashew nut/

33

pine nut.mp.

34

chestnut/

35

hazelnut/

36

pistachio/

37

walnut/

38

peanut allergy/

39

wheat allergy/

40

soybean/

41

plant seed/

42

sunflower/

43

sesame/

44

Papaver/

45

mustard/

46

squash/

47

coconut/

48

lychee/

49

lupin/

50

fruit/

51

vegetable/

52

14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 or
25 or 26 or 27 or 28 or 29 or 30 or 31 or 32 or 33 or 34 or 35 or
36 or 37 or 38 or 39 or 40 or 41 or 42 or 43 or 44 or 45 or 46 or
47 or 48 or 49 or 50 or 51

53

13 and 52

NOTES: Search terms were mapped to Subject Headings when available; otherwise searched
as Keyword (.mp). Searches limited to human studies, English language, and published 2012
to Current.

404

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-3 Summary of Food Allergy Prevalence Studies

Reference

Country

Study Design

Number Invited
or Eligible
Participants

Grabenhenrich
et al., 2016

Europe

Cross-sectional

N/A

1,970 (reports of
anaphylaxis)

McGowan et
al., 2016

US

Cross-sectional

N/A

NHANES III
(1988-1994): 4,995

Participation Rate
N (%)

NHANES (2005­
2006): 2,901

Xepapadaki et
al., 2016

Europe

Cohort

12,049

9,336 (77%)

Datema et al.,
2015

Europe

Cross-sectional

Not indicated

731

Le et al., 2015

Europe (The
Netherlands)

Cross-sectional

6,600

3,864 (59%)

405

APPENDIX B

Method of
Outcome
Assessment

Estimated Prevalence
of Food Allergy, %
(95% CI)

Age of Participants

Food Allergens

<18 years

Hen egg, cow milk,
nuts

Report of
anaphylaxis in
the European
Anaphylaxis
Registry

Food-related
anaphylaxis: 66% of
reports

6-19 years

Peanut, milk, egg,
shrimp

sIgE

Food sensitization
NHANES III: 24.3
(22.1-26.5)
NHANES 2005-2006:
21.6 (19.5-23.7)
Shrimp sensitization
NHANES III: 11.2
(10.0-12.5) NHANES
2005-2006: 6.1
(4.5-7.7)

2 years

Hen egg

sIgE, SPT,
DBPCOFC

Mean raw incidence:
0.84 (0.67-1.03)
Adjusted mean
incidence:
1.23 (0.98-1.51)
(Adjusted for eligible
children who were not
challenged)

Mean age: 32.3 ±
14.8 (SD) years

Hazelnut

SPT
sIgE
DBPCOFC
(N=124)

77.4
83.7
70.2

20-54 years

Hen egg, cow milk,
peanut, hazelnut,
celery, apple,
peach, fish, or
shrimp

Self-report

10.8

Clinical evaluation,
medical history,
sIgE

4.1

DBPCOFC

3.2

continued

406

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-3 Continued

Reference

Country

Study Design

Number Invited
or Eligible
Participants

Schoemaker et
al., 2015

Europe

Cohort

12,049

Participation Rate
N (%)
9,336 (77%)
358 eligible for
DBPCOFC; 248
agreed to at least 1
challenge

Soller et al.,
2015

Canada

Cross-sectional

12,762
households

5,734 households/
15,022 individuals
(45%) (full
participants)
524 households
(4%)
(partial
participants)

Winberg et al.,
2015

Sweden

Cohort

Not indicated

2,612 (96%)

407

APPENDIX B

Age of Participants

Food Allergens

12 and 24 months

Cow milk

Method of
Outcome
Assessment

Estimated Prevalence
of Food Allergy, %
(95% CI)

Parentreport, clinical
examination, sIgE
or SPT, DBPCOFC

Raw incidence:
0.54 (0.41-0.70)
Adjusted incidence:
0.74 (0.56-0.97)
(Adjusted for children
who were eligible but
not challenged, were
placebo reactors, or
who had inconclusive
challenge outcomes,
or who were lost to
follow up)

Adults and children

Peanut, tree nuts,
fish, shellfish,
sesame, milk, egg,
wheat, and/or soy

Self-report,
convincing history,
physician diagnosis

Self-reported food
allergy to any food
Full participants:
6.4 (6.0-6.8)
(unweighted)
7.5 (6.9-8.1)
(weighted)
Partial participants:
2.1 (1.4-2.9)
(unweighted)

11-12 years

Milk, egg, cod,
wheat

Parent-report

Reported food allergy:
4.8 (4-6)

Clinical evaluation
+ sIgE

Clinically evaluated
food allergy: 1.4 (1-2)

DBPCOFC

DBPCOFC-proven
food allergy: 0.6 (0-1)

continued

408

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-3 Continued

Reference

Country

Study Design

Number Invited
or Eligible
Participants

Bunyavanich
et al., 2014

US

Cohort study

1,277

616 (48.2)

Burney et al.,
2014

Europe

Cross-sectional

28,269

17,366 (54.6)

GasparMarques et al.,
2014

Portugal

Cross-sectional

2,228

1,225 (55.0)
participated

Participation Rate
N (%)

1,217 (54.6)
included in analysis

Salo et al.,
2014

US

Cross-sectional

10,348

10,348

Wood et al.,
2014

US

Cross-sectional
(patient survey)

1,651

1,059 (64%)

409

APPENDIX B

Method of
Outcome
Assessment

Estimated Prevalence
of Food Allergy, %
(95% CI)

Age of Participants

Food Allergens

7-10 years

Peanut

Self-reported
symptoms, sIgE
levels, clinical
information, and
combinations of
these variables

Self-reported food
allergy: 4.6 (2.9-6.3)
Clinical food allergy
based on sIgE: 5.0%
(3.5-7.1)
Peanut sIgE ≥0.35
kU/L and prescribed
epi auto-injector: 4.9
(3.2-6.7)
Peanut sIgE ≥14 kU/L:
2.9 (1.6-4.3)
Peanut sIgE ≥14 kU/L
and prescribed epi
auto-injector: 2.0
(0.9-3.2)

20-54 years

Various

Self-report,
physician
diagnosis, sIgE
(≥0.35 kUA/L)

Self-report: 21.0
Physician diagnosis:
4.4
IgE to any foods:
15.81

0-3 years
4-6 years

Various

Self-report

Ever had a food
allergy
0-3 years: 8.6
(6.4-11.5)
4-6 years: 12.1
(10.0-14.7)
Total: 10.8 (9.1-12.6)
Current food allergy
0-3 years: 4.7 (3.1-7.0)
4-6 years: 6.4 (4.9-8.4)
Total: 5.7 (4.6-7.2)

≥1 year

Egg white, cow
milk, peanut,
shrimp

sIgE

Prevalence of food
sensitization: 28

Adults (median age
52 years)

Not specified

Self-report of
anaphylaxis to
food

Reported anaphylaxis:
31

continued

410

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-3 Continued

Reference

Country

Study Design

Number Invited
or Eligible
Participants

Kaya et al.,
2013

Turkey

Cross-sectional

11,233

10,096 (89.9)

Gupta et al.,
2012

US

Cross-sectional

40,104

38,465 (96)

Gupta et al.,
2011, 2013

US

Cross-sectional

40,104

38,480 (96)

Participation Rate
N (%)

411

APPENDIX B

Age of Participants

Food Allergens

Method of
Outcome
Assessment

11-15 years

Various

Parent-report

Confirmation by:
clinical history,
sIgE, SPT, OFC,
DBPCOFC

Estimated Prevalence
of Food Allergy, %
(95% CI)
Lifetime parentreported: 11.3
(10.7-11.9)
Parent-reported
point prevalence: 3.6
(3.2-3.8)
Confirmed food
allergy: 0.15
Confirmed peanut:
0.05
Confirmed tree nut:
0.05

0-17 years

All allergens
(peanut, shellfish,
milk, fin fish, egg,
tree nuts, wheat,
soy)

Parent report
of physician
diagnosis, sIgE,
SPT, OFC, reaction
history

Urban centers: 9.8
(8.6-11.0)
Metro cities: 9.2
(8.4-10.1)
Urban outskirts: 7.8
(7.0-8.6)
Suburban areas: 7.6
(6.9-8.2)
Small towns: 7.2
(5.7-8.6)
Rural areas: 6.2
(5.6-6.8)
P<0.0001

0-17 years

Egg, fin
fish, milk, peanut,
shellfish, soy, tree
nuts, wheat, or
strawberry

Parent report
of physician
diagnosis, sIgE,
SPT, OFC, reaction
history

All allergens: 8.0
(7.7-8.3)
Egg: 0.8 (0.7-0.9)
Fin fish: 0.5 (0.4-0.6)
Milk: 1.7 (1.5-1.8)
Peanut: 2.0 (1.8-2.2)
Shellfish: 1.4 (1.2-1.5)
Soy: 0.4 (0.3-0.4)
Tree nuts: 1.0 (0.9-1.2)
Wheat: 0.4 (0.3-0.5)
Strawberry: 0.4
(0.4-0.5)

continued

412

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-3 Continued
Reference

Country

Study Design

Number Invited
or Eligible
Participants

Osborne et al.,
2011

Australia

Cohort

3,898

2,848 (73)

Sicherer et al.,
2010

US

Cross-sectional

12,658
households

5,300 households
(13,534 subjects)
(42)

Venter et al.,
2010

UK

Cohort

Cohort A: 1,456 Cohort A: 1,218
Cohort B: 2,858 (84)
Cohort C: 969
Cohort B: 1,273
(44)
Cohort C: 891 (92)

Ben-Shoshan
et al., 2009

Canada

Cross-sectional

8,039

(64)

Branum and
Lukacs, 2009

US

Cross-sectional

Not indicated

Not indicated

Participation Rate
N (%)

NOTE: CI = confidence interval; DBPCOFC = double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food
challenge; IgE = immunoglobulin E; N/A = not applicable; OFC = oral food challenge; SE =
standard error; sIgE = food-specific serum IgE; SPT = skin prick test; UK = United Kingdom;
US = United States.

413

APPENDIX B

Age of Participants

Food Allergens

12 months

Raw egg, peanut,
sesame, shellfish, or
cow milk

Method of
Outcome
Assessment

Estimated Prevalence
of Food Allergy, %
(95% CI)

SPT, DBPCOFC

Overall prevalence
(raw egg, peanut
or sesame): 10.4
(9.3-11.5)

Shellfish and milk:
no food challenge
performed

Raw egg: 8.9
(7.8-10.0)
Peanut: 3.0 (2.4-3.8)
Sesame: 0.8 (0.5-1.1)
<18 years

Peanut, tree nuts,
sesame

Self-report

Peanut: 1.4 (1.0-1.9)
Tree nuts: 1.1
Sesame: 0.1 (0-0.2)

3-4 years

Peanut

Cohort A: clinical
history
Cohorts B and C:
SPT and clinical
history or OFC

Cohort A: 0.5
Cohort B: 1.4
Cohort C: 1.2

K-grade 3 students

Peanut

Clinical history,
SPT, sIgE,
DBPCOFC

1.62 (1.31-1.98)

0-17 years

Not indicated

Parent-report

3.9 ± 0.3 (SE)

Peanut, egg, milk,
shrimp (in children
≥6 years)

sIgE

Proportion estimate
± SE
sIgE (peanut): 9.3 ±
0.8
sIgE (egg): 6.7 ± 0.6
sIgE (milk): 12.2 ± 0.9
sIgE (shrimp): 5.2 ±
0.6

Food allergyrelated ambulatory
care visits to
hospital facilities
and physician
offices and
hospitalizations

317,000 (95% CI:
196,000-438,000)
visits per year

414

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Prevalence of Food Allergy: Systematic Review Summaries
Author, year

McWilliam et al., 2015

Aims/Key questions

To provide a comprehensive, up-to-date systematic review of the
population prevalence of tree nut allergy in children and adults,
including details of all individual tree nuts in various regions of
the world

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Population, cross-sectional, and cohort
studies.
• Types of participants: Adults and children; no age
restrictions.
• Primary outcomes: All forms of allergic reactions (primary
and secondary IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated
reactions) were included. All tree nut allergy outcomes
were included for both individual and combined tree nut
allergies. Included eligible studies that reported tree nut
allergy based on self-report, sensitization (sIgE or SPT),
OFC/DBPCOFC or convincing clinical history.
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Reviews, case reports, and studies without
full-text.
• Types of participants: Selected patient groups or those
performed in hospital or allergy clinic settings.

Literature search dates
or year range

January 1996 to December 2014

Number of food allergy
studies included

36

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, narrative text, meta-analysis

415

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Key findings

Confirmed food allergy: Seven studies (all in children) using
OFC (or convincing recent history of allergic reaction together
with positive allergen-specific IgE) to determine a prevalence
range of 0-1.6%.
Probable food allergy: Nine studies combined self-reported food
allergy with additional objective assessment (e.g., specific details
regarding doctor diagnosis or sensitization details [sIgE/SPT])
and were classified as probable food allergy for this review. The
overall probable tree nut allergy prevalence range was 0.05­
4.9%, with only one study reporting adult data.
Self-reported food allergy: Twenty studies based on self-report
found tree nut allergy prevalence range was wider for adults
(0.18-8.9%) and those studies including both adults and children
(0.4-11.4%) than for those studies including only children (0­
3.8%). Overall self-reported tree nut allergy prevalence ranged
from 0 to 11.4%.
Pollen-associated food allergy: Prevalence estimates that included
pollen-associated food allergy reactions to tree nut were
significantly higher (8-11.4%) and were predominantly from
Europe.
Geographic Differences: Prevalence of individual tree nut
allergies varied significantly by region, with hazelnut the most
common tree nut allergy in Europe; walnut and cashew the
most common in the US; and Brazil nut, almond, and walnut
the most common in the UK.

Limitations

Small number of studies reporting challenge-confirmed tree nut
allergy prevalence.
Unable to pool the prevalence estimates due to the large
heterogeneity between the studies.
Data are largely limited to European, US, and UK studies.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?

Y
Y
Y
Y (limited to Englishlanguage articles)
Y/N (no list of
excluded studies)
Y
Y
Y
continued

416

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest (COI) stated?

Y
N
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

Author, year

Umasunthar et al., 2015

Aims/Key questions

To quantify the risk of anaphylaxis for food-allergic people

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Study design: Prospective or retrospective registries,
databases or cohort studies.
• Participants: People with a medically diagnosed food
allergy or a defined population where an assumed
population rate of food allergy could be applied.
• Follow-up: To enable calculation of total person-years of
observation, the authors included studies that specified
either total population and duration of data collection or
anaphylaxis incidence rate.
• Outcomes: The authors included reports of number of
food anaphylaxis events during the follow-up period.
Anaphylaxis determined by self-report, medical coding, or
anaphylaxis admission to hospital.
Exclusion criteria:
• Food-allergic reactions reported were not anaphylactic, or
severity was not defined.
• Time period not defined.
• Population in which food anaphylaxis cases occurred could
not be quantified.

Literature search dates or January 1946 to September 5, 2012
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

34

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, narrative text, meta-analysis

417

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Key findings

Self-reported food anaphylaxis in food allergic people:
• Based on data from 10 studies, meta-analysis gave an
incidence of 4.93 (95% CI: 2.78-8.74; range 0.60-57.89)
per 100 person-years for people ages 0-19 years.
• For peanut allergic people meta-analysis of data from four
studies gave an incidence rate of 2.64 (95% CI: 1.13-6.17;
range 1.64-8.90) per 100 person-years.
Medically coded food anaphylaxis in food-allergic people:
• Based on nine studies, the incidence rate was 0.14 per 100
person-years (95% CI: 0.05-0.35; range 0.01-1.28).
• Based on nine studies, the incidence rate for people ages
0-19 years was 0.20 (95% CI: 0.09-0.43; range 0.01-2.55;
sensitivity analysis 0.08-0.39).
• In sensitivity analysis using different estimated food allergy
prevalence, the incidence varied from 0.11 to 0.21 per 100
person-years.
• The incidence rate of up to 7.00 per 100 person-years has
been reported for children ages 0-4 years.
Hospital admission due to food anaphylaxis in food-allergic
people:
• Based on four studies, the incidence rate was 0.09 (95%
CI: 0.01-0.67; range 0.02-0.81) per 1,000 person-years.
• Based on eight studies, the incidence rate for people ages
0-19 years was 0.20 (95% CI: 0.10-0.43; range 0.04-2.25).
• Based on six studies, the incidence rate for children agse
0-4 years was 0.50 (95% CI: 0.26-0.93; range 0.08-2.82).

Limitations

High heterogeneity between study results, possibly due to
variation in study populations, anaphylaxis definition, and data
collection methods.
Some uncertainty exists about the precision of the risk estimates,
so mean estimates should be interpreted with caution.
The rate of self-reported anaphylaxis varied widely across
studies. Study quality was generally rated as low for studies of
self-reported anaphylaxis. It is likely that studies of self-reported
anaphylaxis overestimate the true incidence of anaphylaxis.
The rate of medically coded anaphylaxis also varied widely
between studies. These data may underestimate food anaphylaxis
occurrence.

continued

418

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y/N (no list of
excluded studies)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

Author, year

Katz et al., 2014

Aims/Key questions

To identify the adjusted prevalence of IgE-mediated soy allergy
in children and perform a secondary analysis of the impact of
age (less than and more than 6 months).

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: analytical transversal studies, studies of
cases and controls, cohort studies, and clinical trials.
• Types of participants: infants and children up to 19 years
old, including newborns.
• Primary outcomes: prevalence of sensitization or allergy
to soy identified by clinical manifestations, parent reports,
serum concentrations of sIgE, SPT, or an OFC.
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: narrative reviews; studies of people older
than age 19 years; studies lacking sufficient congruence
and/or yield between what was described in the objectives
and what was reported.

Literature search dates or 1909 to March 2013
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

40

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, meta-analysis

419

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Key findings

Ten studies reported OFC-proven soy protein allergy in the
general population (i.e., the referred population). Quality of
evidence was low or moderate.
• The weighted prevalence for the general population: 0.27
(95% CI: 0.1%-0.44%) (N/total=4/1,946)
• The weighted prevalence for the referred population: 1.9
(95% CI: 1.1%-2.7%) (N/total=35/1,807)
• The weighted prevalence for atopic children: 2.7 (95% CI:
1.8%-3.3%) (N/total=19/708)
Six studies reported the prevalence of self-reported soy allergy in
the general population. The quality of evidence was low.
• The prevalence was 0.2 (95% CI: 0.0%-0.30%) (N/
total=39/19,732)
Twelve studies reported the prevalence of allergy to soy after
the use of infant formula with soy-based protein. Quality of
evidence was low to moderate.
• The weighted prevalence of OFC-proven soy allergy was
2.5% (95% CI: 2.1%-8.3%) (N/total=18/720)
Six studies reported prevalence of self-reported soy allergy after
use of soy-based formula. Quality of evidence was moderate
except for one study.
• Weighted prevalence was 4.4% (95% CI: 0%-5.6%)
(N/total=108/2,439)

Limitations

All four positive cases of OFC-proven soy allergy in the general
population originated from one study. Cutaneous signs were
noted in only one of these cases.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y/N (no for excluded
studies)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

continued

420

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Author, year

Keet et al., 2014

Aims/Key questions

To determine the prevalence of self-reported food allergy
in children in the US, and explore sources of variation in
prevalence estimates, including case definition, changes over
time, and racial/ethnic differences.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: national surveys; population-based
original reports.
• Types of participants: US general population; children.
• Primary outcomes: self-reported food allergy.
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: studies without individual level data;
abstracts only.
• Types of participants: adults.

Literature search dates or Up to February 2012
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

27 survey administrations (20 survey administrations were used
in the meta-regression)

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, narrative text, meta-analysis with
meta-regression

421

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Key findings

Seven surveys reported self-reported food allergy (National
Maternal and Infant Health Survey; NHANES III; National
Survey of Children’s Health 2003 and 2007; NHIS 1997-2011;
NHANES 2007-2008 and 2009-2010).
Prevalence: It appears that the prevalence of self-reported food
allergy is between 3 and 6 percent.
Prevalence (current versus ever): Compared to estimates of
prevalence of self-reported current food allergy, the prevalence
of self-reported history of food allergy ever was considerably
higher, even after adjusting for year of study (difference: 2.5
percentage points between current and ever/time undefined food
allergy, 95% CI: 1.5%-3.4%; P<0.001 for all children).
Change over time: The self-reported prevalence of food
allergy among children was estimated to have increased by
1.2 percentage points per decade during 1988-2011 (95% CI:
0.7%-1.6%).
Racial/ethnic differences: The rate of increase in self-reported
food allergy prevalence varied significantly by race/ethnicity; the
estimated increase in food allergy prevalence per decade among
Black children was 2.1 percentage points (95% CI: 1.5%-2.7%)
compared to 1.2 percentage points among Hispanics (95% CI:
0.7%-1.7%) and 1.0 percentage points (95% CI: 0.4%-1.6%)
among whites (P=0.01 for comparison of trends between blacks
and whites, and P=0.04 for comparison between blacks and
Hispanics).

Limitations

Surveys included in meta-regression were limited to those
conducted by the CDC.
The studies have too much heterogeneity to calculate a summary
measure of food allergy prevalence.
All outcomes were based on self-report.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?

Y
Y
Y
Y (English-only)
Y/N (no list of
excluded studies)
Y
Y
Y
Y
continued

422

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

Author, year

Nwaru et al., 2014

Aims/Key questions

To provide up-to-date estimates of the prevalence of allergy to
cow milk, egg, wheat, soy, peanut, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish
in Europe.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Systematic reviews and meta-analyses,
cohort studies, case-control studies, cross-sectional studies,
and routine health care studies published in Europe.
• Types of participants: All ages; population-based.
• Primary outcomes: Allergy to cow milk, egg, wheat, soy,
peanut, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish. Assessments based
on self-report, SPT, sIgE, OFC/DBPCOFC, or convincing
clinical history (i.e., outcomes confirmed by a convincing
clinical judgment by a physician without food challenge).
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Review and discussion papers, nonresearch letters and editorials, case studies and case series,
animal studies, and all randomized controlled trials.

Literature search dates or January 2000 to September 30, 2012
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

65 (based on 50 primary studies)

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, narrative text, meta-analysis

Key findings

Self-reported food allergy: The overall pooled estimates for all
age groups of self-reported lifetime prevalence of allergy to cow
milk, egg, wheat, soy, peanut, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish were
6.0% (95% CI: 5.7%-6.4%), 2.5% (2.3%-2.7%), 3.6% (3.0%­
4.2%), 0.4% (0.3%-0.6%), 1.3% (1.2%-1.5%), 2.2% (1.8%­
2.5%), and 1.3% (0.9%-1.7%), respectively.
Food-challenge-defined food allergy: The prevalence of food­
challenge-defined allergy to cow milk, egg, wheat, soy, peanut,
tree nuts, fish, and shellfish was 0.6% (0.5%-0.8%), 0.2%
(0.2%-0.3%), 0.1% (0.01%-0.2%), 0.3% (0.1%-0.4%), 0.2%
(0.2%-0.3%), 0.5% (0.08%-0.8%), 0.1% (0.02%-0.2%), and
0.1% (0.06%-0.3%).

423

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Limitations

Significant heterogeneity between the studies.
Limited generalizability (limited to European studies published
after 2000).

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y/N (no list of
excluded studies)
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

Author, year

Greenhawt et al., 2013

Aims/Key questions

To understand the racial and ethnic disparities in food allergy in
the US.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: English-language articles with data from
the US and research that presented original data related to
racial/ethnic disparity in reported or diagnosed food allergy
(including food sensitization), prevalence, treatment, or
clinical course.
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Systematic reviews, meta-analyses,
abstracts, gray literature, and non-US studies.

Literature search dates or Not provided
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

20

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, narrative text

continued

424

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Key findings

None of the studies used OFC/DBPCOFC to assess food allergy.
In 12 studies, blacks (primarily children) had significantly
increased adjusted odds of food sensitization or significantly
higher proportion or odds of food allergy by self-report,
discharge codes, or clinic-based chart review than did white
children.

Limitations

Major differences in study methodology and reporting precluded
calculation of a pooled estimate of effect.
Food allergy outcomes were measured indirectly.
Low AMSTAR rating.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?

Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
N (did not state the
literature search dates
or range)
N
Y/N (list of excluded
studies not provided)
Y
N
N
N
N
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

425

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Author, year

Lee et al., 2013

Aims/Key questions

To summarize the current literature on food allergy in Asia and
compare it with Western populations.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Reviews, epidemiological/prevalence
studies, clinical studies, anaphylaxis studies, case series/
reports.
• Types of participants: Asian populations.
• Outcomes: Food allergy determined by self-report, SPT,
food elimination testing, DBPCOFC, convincing history,
food avoidance, sIgE, physician diagnosis, or OFC.
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Articles from the Middle East and Turkey;
non-English studies.

Literature search dates or
year range

January 2005 to December 2012

Number of food allergy
studies included

53

Synthesis methods

Summary table, narrative text

Key findings

The overall prevalence of food allergy in Asia is somewhat
comparable to the West. However, the types of food allergy
differ in order of relevance. Shellfish is the most common food
allergen from Asia.
The prevalence of peanut allergy in Asia is extremely low
compared to the West. Among young children and infants, egg
and cow milk allergy are the two most common food allergies,
with prevalence data comparable to Western populations.
Wheat allergy, though uncommon in most Asian countries, is the
most common cause of anaphylaxis in Japan and Korea, and is
increasing in Thailand.

Limitations

Low AMSTAR rating

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?

Y
N
N (did not supplement
the database searches)
N
Y/N (did not include
list of excluded studies)
continued

426

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y/N (not for all 53
studies)
N
N
Not applicable (findings
were not combined)
N
N

Author, year

Panesar et al., 2013

Aims/Key questions

To understand and describe the epidemiology of anaphylaxis
from any cause in Europe and describe how these characteristics
vary by person, place, and time.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Systematic reviews and/or meta-analyses,
cohort studies, cross-sectional studies, case-control studies,
and routine health care studies.
• Primary outcomes: Incidence, prevalence, and trends over
time of anaphylaxis in Europe.
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Reviews, discussion papers, nonresearch
letters and editorials, case studies, and case series plus
animal studies.

Literature search dates or January 1, 2000, to September 30, 2012
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

49 (3 included in meta-analysis)
Only 10 were food allergy studies and none of these was in the
meta-analysis

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, narrative text, meta-analysis

Key findings

Meta-analysis yielded a pooled estimated prevalence of
anaphylaxis, due to any cause, of 0.3% (95% CI 0.1%-0.5%).
Ten studies found that the proportions of food allergy reactions
that resulted in anaphylaxis ranged from 0.4% to 39.9%.
One study of 163 children found the food allergens that most
commonly resulted in anaphylaxis were cow milk (29%), hen
egg (25%), hazelnut (5%), peanut (4%), kiwi (4%), walnut
(4%), pine nut (3%), fish (3%), wheat (2%), soy (2%), shrimp
(2%), apricot (2%), and sesame (2%).

427

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Limitations

No discussion of how food allergy was determined.
Very few studies were on food allergy.
Limited to European populations.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

Author, year

Umasunthar et al., 2013

Aims/Key questions

To estimate the incidence of fatal food-induced anaphylaxis for
people with food allergy and relate this to other mortality risks
in the general population.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Study design: Registries, databases, or cohort studies
including ≥1 case of fatal food anaphylaxis.
• Participants: A defined population where an assumed
population rate of food allergy could be applied.
• Follow-up: To enable calculation of total person-years of
observation, the authors included studies that specified
either total population and duration of data collection or
anaphylaxis incidence rate.
• Outcomes: Reports of number of fatal food anaphylaxis
events during the follow-up period.
Exclusion criteria:
• Fatalities neither probably nor definitely due to
anaphylaxis, in the judgment of the original study authors.
• Time period not defined.
• Population in which food anaphylaxis cases occurred could
not be quantified.

continued

428

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Literature search dates or January 1946 to September 5, 2012
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

13

Synthesis methods

Summary table, meta-analysis

Key findings

Meta-analysis estimates the incidence rate of fatal food
anaphylaxis in a food-allergic person as:
• 1.81 (95% CI: 0.94-3.45; range 0.63-6.68) per million
person-years (micromorts) based on 10 studies
• 3.25 (95% CI: 1.73-6.10; range 0.94-15.75) micromorts in
those ages 0 to 19 based on 10 studies
• 2.13 (95% CI: 1.09-4.16; range 1.03-8.77) micromorts for
peanut allergy based on seven studies
In sensitivity analysis with different estimated food allergy
prevalence, the incidence varied from 1.35 to 2.71 per million
person-years.

Limitations

Study quality was mixed, and study results had high
heterogeneity, possibly due to variation in food allergy
prevalence and data collection methods.
Study authors were unable to exclude the possibility of a
systematic bias operating across different studies, in either the
acquisition and coding of fatal food anaphylaxis data or the
estimation of food allergy prevalence.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?

Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y/N (list of excluded
studies was not
provided)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

429

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Author, year

Chafen et al., 2010

Aims/Key questions

To systematically review the evidence on the prevalence of food
allergies.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• The initial inclusion criteria were broad and included
prior systematic reviews, meta-analyses, or both, and
studies presenting original data related to the prevalence,
diagnosis, management, or prevention of food allergy.
After assessing the relative quantities of studies on these
topics, the authors restricted studies of prevalence to those
with population-based samples (and systematic reviews
of such studies); studies of diagnostic tests to those that
presented sufficient data to calculate both sensitivity and
specificity, had a prospective, defined study population, and
used food challenge as a criterion standard; and studies
of management and prevention to those that were either
controlled trials (both randomized and nonrandomized) or
systematic reviews.

Literature search dates or January 1988 to September 2009
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

6 studies on prevalence of food allergy

Synthesis methods

Narrative text

continued

430

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Key findings

One meta-analysis on incidence and prevalence.
• The pooled estimate of prevalence of cow milk allergy was
3.5% (95% CI: 2.9%-4.1%) by self-report; 0.6% to 0.9%
from SPT, sIgE, and DBPCOFC.
• The pooled estimates (%, 95% CI) for self-report and other
methods were: 1.3% (95% CI: 1.0%-1.6%) versus 0.3%
to 0.9% (egg); 0.75% (95% CI: 0.6%-0.9%) versus 0.75%
(peanut); 0.6% (95% CI: 0.5%-0.7%) versus 0.2% to
0.3% (fish); and 1.1% (95% CI: 1.0%-1.2%) versus 0.6%
(shellfish).
Three population-based studies on change in prevalence over
time in the UK, Canada, and the US.
• The UK study found the parent-reported prevalence of
peanut allergy increased from 0.5% in 1989 to 1.0% in
1994-1996 (P=0.20), and the prevalence of IgE antibodies
increased from 1.1% to 3.3% (P=0.001).
• In Canada, prevalence of peanut allergy was 1.5% in
2000-2002 and increased to 1.63% in 2005-2007 (non­
significant difference) (based on parent-report, SPT, sIgE,
and food challenge).
• In the US, authors estimated that 3.3% of US children had
food allergies in 1997 versus 3.9% in 2007 (statistically
significant difference).
Overall Findings:
• Food allergy affects more than 1% to 2% but less than
10% of the population.
• It is unclear whether the prevalence of food allergies is
increasing.

Limitations

• Heterogeneity in the criteria used for the diagnosis of food
allergy made comparisons of prevalence across studies
dependent on the methods used for the diagnosis and
prevented data pooling.
• Authors were unable to perform formal evaluations for
publication bias due to the heterogeneity of the included
studies.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?

Y
Y
Y
Y (limited to Englishonly articles)
N
N
Y
Y

431

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?

Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Not applicable (findings
on prevalence were not
combined)
N
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

Author, year

Zuidmeer et al., 2008

Aims/Key questions

To assess the prevalence of allergies to plant food according to
the different subjective and objective assessment methods.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Population-based cross-sectional and
cohort studies.
• Primary outcomes: Food allergy (OFC/DBPCOFC), food
sensitization (SPT, sIgE), or perceived food allergy (parent-/
self-report).
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Case-control studies; studies in selected
patient groups (e.g., asthma or eczema patients); studies
performed in clinical settings; studies that had enriched
study samples with patients with allergy (for further clinical
studies); or articles that did not report the sample size.

Literature search dates or January 1990 to December 2006
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

36 (33 publications)

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, meta-analysis

continued

432

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Key findings

Based on 4 studies using food challenge tests, the prevalence of
allergy to fruits ranged from 0.1% to 4.3%.
Based on 2 studies using food challenge tests, the prevalence of
allergy to vegetables ranged from 0.1% to 0.3%.
Based on 3 studies using food challenge tests, the prevalence of
allergy to nuts ranged from 0.1% (almond) to 4.3% (hazelnut).
Both for challenge tests and for sensitization assessed by SPT, the
highest prevalence estimates of more than 4% were found for
hazelnut.
Two studies from the UK and one from Germany reported
positive wheat challenge tests in children with a prevalence as
high as 0.5%. In adults, the prevalence of sensitization to wheat
(assessed by IgE) was >3% in several studies.
In adults and adolescents, the highest prevalence estimates of
allergy to soy were found in three Swedish studies (sensitization
assessed by IgE as high as almost 3%). Studies from all other
countries showed prevalences well below 1% regardless of
method used or age group.
Meta-analyses showed significant heterogeneity between studies
regardless of food item or age group. In adults, there was
significant heterogeneity (P<0.001) among the seven studies
regarding perception of allergy caused by fruits (summary
prevalence estimate, 1.22%; 95% CI: 0.82%-1.63%), vegetables
(six studies: 0.98%; 95% CI: 0.52%-1.45%), and wheat
(five studies: 0.40%; 95% CI: 0.21%-0.59%), as well as for
sensitization against wheat (assessed by IgE in five studies:
2.08%; 95% CI: 0.87%-3.29%). Similarly, among studies
in children, the heterogeneity was significant (P<0.001) for
perception of allergy caused by tree nuts (five studies: 0.52%;
95% CI: 0.20%-0.85%) or soy (seven studies: 0.34%; 95%
CI: 0.12%-0.56%), whereas the heterogeneity was of a lower
level but still significant (P=5.016) among the five studies
assessing sensitization against wheat by SPT (0.43%; 95% CI:
0.16%-0.70%).

433

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Limitations

Few studies used OFC or DBPCOFC to determine food
allergy. Meta-analysis was done only when five or more studies
were available, so, due to the lack of studies using OFC or
DBPCOFC, meta-analysis was done only for studies that
determined food allergy by SPT, sIgE, or self-report.
The authors could not rule out that studies were missed,
particularly from non-European or non-American journals.
The comparison of prevalence estimates from different studies is
hampered by using different types of prevalence.
A limitation of the interpretation of findings on allergic
sensitization may be that positive IgE or SPT results to plantderived foods can be a result of cross-reactivity to pollen.
Consequently, the prevalence of food allergy may rise or fall
with the presence of the sensitizing pollen in the study area,
which depends on the season and climate and may vary from
year to year.
Fairly low AMSTAR rating.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?

Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y (study selection)/
Not clear for data
extraction
N (searched only one
database)
N
Y/N (no list of
excluded studies)
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

continued

434

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE B-4 Continued
Author, year

Rona et al., 2007

Aims/Key questions

To assess the prevalence of food allergy by performing a meta­
analysis according to the method of assessment used.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Primary outcomes: Self-reported symptoms, specific
IgE positive, specific skin prick test positive, symptoms
combined with sensitization, and food challenge studies.
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Studies restricted to the prevalence of food
allergy in groups with asthma, eczema, or allergic rhinitis
and those performed in selected patients in a clinical
setting. Also excluded studies using a case control design if
it did not provide a prevalence estimate for the community,
and duplicate publications. Excluded articles when the
original community sample was enriched with a sample
including patients, or the sample size was not provided.

Literature search dates or January 1990 to December 2005
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

51

Synthesis methods

Narrative text, summary tables, meta-analysis

Key findings

The studies showed marked heterogeneity regardless of type of
assessment or food item considered, and in most analyses this
persisted after age stratification.
Self-reported prevalence of food allergy varied from 1.2% to
17% for milk, 0.2% to 7% for egg, 0% to 2% for peanuts and
fish, 0% to 10% for shellfish, and 3% to 35% for any food.
Prevalence of food allergy determined by OFC or DBPCOFC:
• The prevalence for fish was near 0% (based on two
studies).
• The prevalence for milk varied from 0% to 3% (based
on seven studies). A marked heterogeneity was observed
for milk in preschool children, the only group for which
sufficient studies were available for useful analysis.
• The prevalence for egg varied from 0% to 1.7% (based on
three studies).
• The prevalence for any food varied from 1% to 10.8%
(based on six studies).
Meta-analysis results were presented graphically in this paper.

435

APPENDIX B

TABLE B-4 Continued
Limitations

In the overall estimate of the prevalence of food allergy related
to food challenge, the authors were unable to omit positive
challenges to nonallergic food hypersensitivity; thus, these
estimates may give an overestimate of prevalence.
Marked heterogeneity among studies.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
N
Y/N (list of excluded
studies not provided)
N
N
N
Y
N
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

NOTE: CDC = Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; CI = confidence interval;
DBPCOFC = double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenge; IgE = immunoglobulin E;
NHANES = National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; NHIS = National Health
Interview Survey; sIgE = food-specific serum IgE; SPT = skin prick test; UK = United Kingdom;
US = United States.

436

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

REFERENCES
Ben-Shoshan, M., R. S. Kagan, R. Alizadehfar, L. Joseph, E. Turnbull, Y. St Pierre, and A. E.
Clarke. 2009. Is the prevalence of peanut allergy increasing?: A 5-year follow-up study
in children in Montreal. J Allergy Clin Immunol 123(4):783-788.
Branum, A. M., and S. L. Lukacs. 2009. Food allergy among children in the United States.
Pediatrics 124(6):1549-1555.
Bunyavanich, S., S. L. Rifas-Shiman, T. A. Platts-Mills, L. Workman, J. E. Sordillo, M.
W. Gillman, D. R. Gold, and A. A. Litonjua. 2014. Peanut allergy prevalence among
school-age children in a US cohort not selected for any disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol
134(3):753-755.
Burney, P. G., J. Potts, I. Kummeling, E. N. Mills, M. Clausen, R. Dubakiene, L. Barreales,
C. Fernandez-Perez, M. Fernandez-Rivas, T. M. Le, A. C. Knulst, M. L. Kowalski, J.
Lidholm, B. K. Ballmer-Weber, C. Braun-Fahlander, T. Mustakov, T. Kralimarkova, T.
Popov, A. Sakellariou, N. G. Papadopoulos, S. A. Versteeg, L. Zuidmeer, J. H. Akkerdaas,
K. Hoffmann-Sommergruber, and R. van Ree. 2014. The prevalence and distribution of
food sensitization in European adults. Allergy 69(3):365-371.
Chafen, J. J., S. J. Newberry, M. A. Riedl, D. M. Bravata, M. Maglione, M. J. Suttorp, V.
Sundaram, N. M. Paige, A. Towfigh, B. J. Hulley, and P. G. Shekelle. 2010. Diagnosing
and managing common food allergies: A systematic review. JAMA 303(18):1848-1856.
Datema, M. R., L. Zuidmeer-Jongejan, R. Asero, L. Barreales, S. Belohlavkova, F. de Blay,
P. Bures, M. Clausen, R. Dubakiene, D. Gislason, M. Jedrzejczak-Czechowicz, M. L.
Kowalski, A. C. Knulst, T. Kralimarkova, T. M. Le, A. Lovegrove, J. Marsh, N. G.
Papadopoulos, T. Popov, N. Del Prado, A. Purohit, G. Reese, I. Reig, S. L. Seneviratne,
A. Sinaniotis, S. A. Versteeg, S. Vieths, A. H. Zwinderman, C. Mills, J. Lidholm, K.
Hoffmann-Sommergruber, M. Fernandez-Rivas, B. Ballmer-Weber, and R. van Ree. 2015.
Hazelnut allergy across Europe dissected molecularly: A EuroPrevall outpatient clinic
survey. J Allergy Clin Immunol 136(2):382-391.
Gaspar-Marques, J., P. Carreiro-Martins, A. L. Papoila, I. Caires, C. Pedro, J. Araujo-Martins,
D. Virella, J. Rosado-Pinto, P. Leiria-Pinto, and N. Neuparth. 2014. Food allergy and
anaphylaxis in infants and preschool-age children. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 53(7):652-657.
Grabenhenrich, L. B., S. Dolle, A. Moneret-Vautrin, A. Kohli, L. Lange, T. Spindler, F. Rueff,
K. Nemat, I. Maris, E. Roumpedaki, K. Scherer, H. Ott, T. Reese, T. Mustakov, R. Lang,
M. Fernandez-Rivas, M. L. Kowalski, M. B. Bilo, J. O. Hourihane, N. G. Papadopoulos,
K. Beyer, A. Muraro, and M. Worm. 2016. Anaphylaxis in children and adolescents: The
European Anaphylaxis Registry. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(4):1128-1137.
Greenhawt, M., C. Weiss, M. L. Conte, M. Doucet, A. Engler, and C. A. Camargo, Jr. 2013.
Racial and ethnic disparity in food allergy in the United States: A systematic review. J
Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 1(4):378-386.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, M. R. Warrier, B. Smith, R. Kumar, J. Pongracic, and J. L. Holl.
2011. The prevalence, severity, and distribution of childhood food allergy in the United
States. Pediatrics 128(1):e9-e17.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, B. Smith, M. R. Warrier, J. Pongracic, and J. L. Holl. 2012.
Geographic variability of childhood food allergy in the United States. Clin Pediatr (Phila)
51(9):856-861.
Gupta, R. S., E. E. Springston, B. Smith, J. Pongracic, J. L. Holl, and M. R. Warrier. 2013.
Parent report of physician diagnosis in pediatric food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
131(1):150-156.
Katz, Y., P. Gutierrez-Castrellon, M. G. Gonzalez, R. Rivas, B. W. Lee, and P. Alarcon. 2014.
A comprehensive review of sensitization and allergy to soy-based products. Clin Rev
Allergy Immunol 46(3):272-281.

APPENDIX B

437

Kaya, A., M. Erkocoglu, E. Civelek, B. Cakir, and C. N. Kocabas. 2013. Prevalence of con­
firmed IgE-mediated food allergy among adolescents in Turkey. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
24(5):456-462.
Keet, C. A., J. H. Savage, S. Seopaul, R. D. Peng, R. A. Wood, and E. C. Matsui. 2014.
Temporal trends and racial/ethnic disparity in self-reported pediatric food allergy in the
United States. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 112(3):222-229.
Le, T. M., E. van Hoffen, I. Kummeling, J. Potts, B. K. Ballmer-Weber, C. A. BruijnzeelKoomen, A. F. Lebens, J. Lidholm, T. M. Lindner, A. Mackie, E. C. Mills, R. van Ree, S.
Vieths, M. Fernandez-Rivas, P. G. Burney, and A. C. Knulst. 2015. Food allergy in the
Netherlands: Differences in clinical severity, causative foods, sensitization and DBPCFC
between community and outpatients. Clin Transl Allergy 5:8.
Lee, A. J., M. Thalayasingam, and B. W. Lee. 2013. Food allergy in Asia: How does it com­
pare? Asia Pac Allergy 3(1):3-14.
McGowan, E. C., R. D. Peng, P. M. Salo, D. C. Zeldin, and C. A. Keet. 2016. Changes in
food-specific IgE over time in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES). J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 4(4):713-720.
McWilliam, V., J. Koplin, C. Lodge, M. Tang, S. Dharmage, and K. Allen. 2015. The preva­
lence of tree nut allergy: A systematic review. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 15(9):555.
Nwaru, B. I., L. Hickstein, S. S. Panesar, G. Roberts, A. Muraro, A. Sheikh, EAACI Food Al­
lergy and Anaphylaxis Guidelines Group. 2014. Prevalence of common food allergies in
Europe: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Allergy 69(8):992-1007.
Osborne, N. J., J. J. Koplin, P. E. Martin, L. C. Gurrin, A. J. Lowe, M. C. Matheson, A. L.
Ponsonby, M. Wake, M. L. Tang, S. C. Dharmage, K. J. Allen, and HealthNuts Investiga­
tors. 2011. Prevalence of challenge-proven IgE-mediated food allergy using populationbased sampling and predetermined challenge criteria in infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol
127(3):668-676.
Panesar, S. S., S. Javad, D. de Silva, B. I. Nwaru, L. Hickstein, A. Muraro, G. Roberts,
M. Worm, M. B. Bilo, V. Cardona, A. E. Dubois, A. Dunn Galvin, P. Eigenmann,
M. Fernandez-Rivas, S. Halken, G. Lack, B. Niggemann, A. F. Santos, B. J. VliegBoerstra, Z. Q. Zolkipli, A. Sheikh, EAACI Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Guidelines
Group. 2013. The epidemiology of anaphylaxis in Europe: A systematic review. Allergy
68(11):1353-1361.
Rona, R. J., T. Keil, C. Summers, D. Gislason, L. Zuidmeer, E. Sodergren, S. T. Sigurdardottir,
T. Lindner, K. Goldhahn, J. Dahlstrom, D. McBride, and C. Madsen. 2007. The preva­
lence of food allergy: A meta-analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(3):638-646.
Salo, P. M., S. J. Arbes, Jr., R. Jaramillo, A. Calatroni, C. H. Weir, M. L. Sever, J. A. Hoppin,
K. M. Rose, A. H. Liu, P. J. Gergen, H. E. Mitchell, and D. C. Zeldin. 2014. Prevalence of
allergic sensitization in the United States: Results from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) 2005-2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 134(2):350-359.
Schoemaker, A. A., A. B. Sprikkelman, K. E. Grimshaw, G. Roberts, L. Grabenhenrich, L.
Rosenfeld, S. Siegert, R. Dubakiene, O. Rudzeviciene, M. Reche, A. Fiandor, N. G.
Papadopoulos, A. Malamitsi-Puchner, A. Fiocchi, L. Dahdah, S. T. Sigurdardottir, M.
Clausen, A. Stanczyk-Przyluska, K. Zeman, E. N. Mills, D. McBride, T. Keil, and K.
Beyer. 2015. Incidence and natural history of challenge-proven cow’s milk allergy in
European children—EuroPrevall birth cohort. Allergy 70(8):963-972.
Sicherer, S. H., A. Munoz-Furlong, J. H. Godbold, and H. A. Sampson. 2010. US prevalence
of self-reported peanut, tree nut, and sesame allergy: 11-year follow-up. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 125(6):1322-1326.

438

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Soller, L., M. Ben-Shoshan, D. W. Harrington, M. Knoll, J. Fragapane, L. Joseph, Y. St Pierre,
S. La Vieille, K. Wilson, S. J. Elliott, and A. E. Clarke. 2015. Adjusting for nonresponse
bias corrects overestimates of food allergy prevalence. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
3(2):291-293.
Umasunthar, T., J. Leonardi-Bee, M. Hodes, P. J. Turner, C. Gore, P. Habibi, J. O. Warner,
and R. J. Boyle. 2013. Incidence of fatal food anaphylaxis in people with food allergy: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Allergy 43(12):1333-1341.
Umasunthar, T., J. Leonardi-Bee, P. J. Turner, M. Hodes, C. Gore, J. O. Warner, and R. J.
Boyle. 2015. Incidence of food anaphylaxis in people with food allergy: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Allergy 45(11):1621-1636.
Venter, C., S. Hasan Arshad, J. Grundy, B. Pereira, C. Bernie Clayton, K. Voigt, B. Higgins, and
T. Dean. 2010. Time trends in the prevalence of peanut allergy: Three cohorts of children
from the same geographical location in the UK. Allergy 65(1):103-108.
Winberg, A., C. E. West, A. Strinnholm, L. Nordstrom, L. Hedman, and E. Ronmark. 2015.
Assessment of allergy to milk, egg, cod, and wheat in Swedish schoolchildren: A popula­
tion based cohort study. PLoS One 10(7):e0131804.
Wood, R. A., C. A. Camargo, Jr., P. Lieberman, H. A. Sampson, L. B. Schwartz, M. Zitt, C.
Collins, M. Tringale, M. Wilkinson, J. Boyle, and F. E. Simons. 2014. Anaphylaxis in
America: The prevalence and characteristics of anaphylaxis in the United States. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 133(2):461-467.
Xepapadaki, P., A. Fiocchi, L. Grabenhenrich, G. Roberts, K. E. Grimshaw, A. Fiandor, J. I.
Larco, S. Sigurdardottir, M. Clausen, N. G. Papadopoulos, L. Dahdah, A. Mackie, A. B.
Sprikkelman, A. A. Schoemaker, R. Dubakiene, I. Butiene, M. L. Kowalski, K. Zeman,
S. Gavrili, T. Keil, and K. Beyer. 2016. Incidence and natural history of hen’s egg allergy
in the first 2 years of life—The EuroPrevall birth cohort study. Allergy 71(3):350-357.
Zuidmeer, L., K. Goldhahn, R. J. Rona, D. Gislason, C. Madsen, C. Summers, E. Soder­
gren, J. Dahlstrom, T. Lindner, S. T. Sigurdardottir, D. McBride, and T. Keil. 2008.
The prevalence of plant food allergies: A systematic review. J Allergy Clin Immunol
121(5):1210-1218.

Appendix C
Risk Determinants Literature
Search Strategy

Electronic literature searches of published systematic reviews (from
2010 to September 2015) and primary studies (from 2012 to September
2015) indexed in Medline, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
EMBASE, and ISI Web of Science were conducted. For systematic reviews,
a broad search was conducted to identify all systematic reviews with or
without meta-analysis from 2010 onward related to food allergies or food
sensitizations without restrictions to any interventions or exposures. For
primary studies, search strategies in European Academy of Allergy & Clini­
cal Immunology (EAACI) (de Silva et al., 2014) and Marrs et al. systematic
reviews (Marrs et al., 2013) were adopted. The EAACI search strategies
were developed to identify all randomized controlled trials, quasi-random­
ized controlled trials, controlled clinical trials, controlled before-and-after
studies, interrupted time series studies, and prospective cohort studies that
were primarily concerned with preventing sensitization to food(s) and/
or the development of food allergy. The Marrs et al. search strategy was
intended to capture any study designs describing food allergy or sensiti­
zation overall and to individual foods (milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts, fish,
wheat, sesame, shellfish, and seafood) combined with search terms of fac­
tors that directly or indirectly influence microbial exposure (Marrs et al.,
2013). All searches were restricted to human studies that were published in
the English language from 2012 onward. Duplicate citations across data­
bases were removed before screening. Medline searches conducted for this
report for systematic reviews and individual studies are in Table C-1. Med­
line searches were used to develop the search strategies for the EMBASE
and Web of Science databases.
439

440

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Abstrackr software (abstrackr.cebm.brown.edu), Endnote, and Microsoft Excel were used to manage the search outputs, screening, and data
abstraction. After a training session to ensure understanding of the inclu­
sion and exclusion criteria, title/abstract screening was conducted indepen­
dently by two reviewers using a screening form that listed the inclusion
and exclusion criteria and allowed selection of reasons for exclusion. A
third reviewer reconciled the discrepant title/abstract selections. Full-text
articles of all accepted title/abstracts were then retrieved and screened by
one reviewer based on the study eligibility criteria. Second-level screening
of full text articles was conducted by two reviewers and differences recon­
ciled by a third reviewer. Boxes C-1 and C-2 list the study inclusion and
exclusion criteria, respectively. Figure C-1 illustrates the study selection
flow. Summary tables for the systematic reviews and studies selected for the
evidence-based review are included in Tables C2-C6.

441

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-1 Medline Search Strategy to Identify Relevant Literature
Search Number

Search Terms
a. Systematic Reviews Search Strategy

1

2

exp food hypersensitivity/ or exp egg hypersensitivity/ or exp
milk hypersensitivity/ or exp nut hypersensitivity/ or exp peanut
hypersensitivity/ or exp wheat hypersensitivity/
(food$ adj2 (allergy$ or hypersensitivity)).mp.

3

((milk or egg$ or shellfish or fish or nut$ or peanut$ or wheat or
soybean$ or seasame or seafood$) adj1 (allerg$ or hypersensitivity or
sensitization)).mp.

4

(sensitization or hypersensitivity).mp.

5

(food$ or diet$).mp.

6

4 and 5 (13121)

7

1 or 2 or 3 or 6 (15068)

8

(rat or rats or cow or cows or chicken? or horse or horses or mice or
mouse or bovine or animal?).ti.

9

exp animals/not humans.sh.

10

8 or 9

11

7 not 10

12

MEDLINE.tw.

13

systematic review.tw.

14

meta analysis.pt.

15

or/12-14

16

11 and 15

17

limit 16 to (English language and yr=“2010 -Current”)
b. Primary Studies: EAACI Search Strategy

1

exp food hypersensitivity/ or exp egg hypersensitivity/ or exp
milk hypersensitivity/ or exp nut hypersensitivity/ or exp peanut
hypersensitivity/ or exp wheat hypersensitivity/

2

(food$ adj2 (allergy$ or hypersensitivity)).mp.

3

((milk or egg$ or shellfish or fish or nut$ or peanut$ or wheat or
soybean$ or seasame or seafood$) adj1 (allerg$ or hypersensitivity or
sensitization)).mp.

4

(sensitization or hypersensitivity).mp.

5

(food$ or diet$).mp.

6

4 and 5 (13121)

7

1 or 2 or 3 or 6 (15068)

8

(rat or rats or cow or cows or chicken? or horse or horses or mice or
mouse or bovine or animal?).ti.
continued

442

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-1 Continued
Search Number

Search Terms

9

exp animals/ not humans.sh.

10

8 or 9

11

7 not 10

12

randomized controlled trial.pt.

13

controlled clinical trial.pt.

14

randomized.ab.

15

placebo.ab.

16

clinical trials as topic.sh.

17

randomly.ab.

18

trial.ti.

19

or/16-22

20

intervention?.ti. or (intervention? adj6 (clinician? or collaborat$ or
community or complex or DESIGN$ or doctor? or educational or
family doctor? or family physician? or family practitioner? or financial
or GP or general practice? or hospital? or impact? or improv$ or
individuali?e? or individuali?ing or interdisciplin$ or multicomponent
or multi-component or multidisciplin$ or multidisciplin$ or multifacet$
or multi-facet$ or multimodal$ or multimodal$ or personali?e? or
personali?ing or pharmacies or pharmacist? or pharmacy or physician?
or practitioner? or prescrib$ or prescription? or primary care or
professional$ or provider? or regulatory or regulatory or tailor$ or
target$ or team$ or usual care)).ab.

21

(pre-intervention? or preintervention? or “pre intervention?” or
postintervention? or postintervention? or “post intervention?”).ti,ab.

22

(hospital$ or patient?).hw. and (study or studies or care or health$
or practitioner? or provider? or physician? or nurse? or nursing or
doctor?).ti,hw.

23

demonstration project?.ti,ab.

24

(pre-post or “pre test$” or pretest$ or posttest$ or “post test$” or (pre
adj5 post)).ti,ab.

25

(pre-workshop or post-workshop or (before adj3 workshop) or (after
adj3 workshop)).ti,ab.

26

trial.ti. or ((study adj3 aim?) or “our study”).ab.

27

(before adj10 (after or during)).ti,ab.

28

(“quasi-experiment$” or quasiexperiment$ or “quasi random$” or
quasirandom$ or “quasi control$” or quasicontrol$ or ((quasi$ or
experimental) adj3 (method$ or study or trial or design$))).ti,ab,hw.

29

(“time series” adj2 interrupt$).ti,ab,hw.

443

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-1 Continued
Search Number

Search Terms

30

31

(time points adj3 (over or multiple or three or four or five or six or
seven or eight or nine or ten or eleven or twelve or month$ or hour? or
day? or “more than”)).ab.
pilot.ti.

32

Pilot projects/

33

(clinical trial or controlled clinical trial or multicenter study).pt.

34

(multicentre or multicenter or multi-centre or multi-center).ti.

35

random$.ti,ab. or controlled.ti.

36

(control adj3 (area or cohort? or compare? or condition or design or
group? or intervention? or participant? or study)).ab. not (controlled
clinical trial or randomized controlled trial).pt.

37

comment on.cm. or review.ti,pt. or randomized controlled trial.pt.

38

or/24-41

39

exp cohort studies/

40

cohort$.tw.

41

controlled clinical trial.pt.

42

epidemiologic methods/

43

exp case-control studies/

44

(case$ and control$).tw.

45

or/43-48

46

11 and 19

47

11 and 38

48

11 and 45

49

or/46-48

50

limit 49 to yr=“2012 -Current”

51

limit 50 to “review articles”

52

50 not 51

1

Measles/ or measles.mp,

2

exp Mumps/ or mumps.mp,

3

Whooping Cough/ or whooping cough.mp,

4

exp Pneumonia/ or pneumonia.mp,

5

exp Chickenpox/ or chickenpox.mp,

6

hepatitis/ or hepatitis a/ or exp hepatitis b/

c. Primary Studies: Marrs et al. Search Strategy

continued

444

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-1 Continued
Search Number

Search Terms

7

Hepatitis A/ or exp Hepatitis B/

8

hepatitis.mp,

9

exp Herpes Simplex/ or herpes simplex.mp,

10

exp Rubella/ or rubella.mp,

11

exp Helicobacter pylori/ or helicobacter pylori.mp,

12

exp Tuberculosis/ or tuberculosis.mp,

13

exp Mycobacterium bovis/

14

exp Helminthiasis/

15

helminthiasis.mp,

16

exp Helminths/

17

helminths.mp,

18

exp Necator americanus/

19

Necator americanus.mp,

20

exp Trichuris/ or trichuris.mp,

21

exp Ascaris lumbricoides/ or Ascaris lumbricoides.mp,

22

exp Schistosomiasis/ or Schistosomiasis.mp,

23

exp Enterobius/

24

enterobius vermicularis.mp,

25

exp Bacterial Infections/

26

bacterial infection*.mp,

27

or/1-26

28

hygiene/ or skin care/

29

hygiene.mp,

30

hygiene hypothesis.mp,

31

exp Anthroposophy/

32

anthroposoph*.mp,

33

Child Day Care Centers/

34

day care.mp,

35

Siblings/

36

sibling*.mp,

37

Birth Order/

38

birth order.mp,

39

nurser*.mp,

445

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-1 Continued
Search Number

Search Terms

40

agriculture/ or animal husbandry/

41

agriculture.mp,

42

farming.mp,

43

farms.mp,

44

farm.mp,

45

Animals, Domestic/

46

pets.mp,

47

pet.mp,

48

Cats/

49

cats.mp,

50

cat.mp,

51

Dogs/

52

dog.mp,

53

dogs.mp,

54

exp Endotoxins/

55

endotoxin*.mp,

56

exp Probiotics/

57

probiotic*.mp,

58

lactobacillus.mp,

59

exp Lactobacillus/

60

intestinal microflora.mp,

61

mycobacterium vaccae.mp,

62

Prebiotics/

63

pre-biotic*.mp,

64

prebiotic*.mp,

65

pro-biotic*.mp,

66

exp Anti-Bacterial Agents/

67

antibiotic*.mp,

68

Disinfectants/ or disinfectant.mp,

69

vaccination.mp,

70

vaccinat*.mp,

71

unpasteuri* milk.mp,

72

unpasteuri* cow* milk.mp,
continued

446

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-1 Continued
Search Number

Search Terms

73

pasteuri* milk.mp,

74

pasteuri* cow* milk.mp,

75

raw milk.mp,

76

raw cow* milk.mp,

77

unhomogeni* milk.mp,

78

unhomogeni* cow* milk.mp,

79

un-pasteuri* milk.mp,

80

un-homogeni* milk.mp,

81

or/28-80

82

27 or 81

83

exp food hypersensitivity/ or exp egg hypersensitivity/ or exp
milk hypersensitivity/ or exp nut hypersensitivity/ or exp peanut
hypersensitivity/ or exp wheat hypersensitivity/

84

(food$ adj2 (allergy$ or hypersensitivity)).mp.

85

((milk or egg$ or shellfish or fish or nut$ or peanut$ or wheat or
soybean$ or seasame or seafood$) adj1 (allerg$ or hypersensitivity or
sensitization)).mp,

86

(sensitization or hypersensitivity).mp,

87

(food$ or diet$).mp,

88

86 and 87

89

83 or 84 or 85 or 88

90

88 and 89

91

Cesarean Section/

92

caesarian section.mp,

93

cesarian section.mp,

94

mode of delivery.mp,

95

microbiota.mp,

95

82 or 91 or 92 or 93 or 94 or 95

96

90 and 95

97

limit 96 to “review articles”

98

96 not 97

99

limit 98 to yr=“2012 -Current”

447

APPENDIX C

BOX C-1
Study Inclusion Criteria
Studies that reported food allergy or sensitization outcomes, including
• Food challenge outcomes,
• Physician-diagnosed food allergy,
• Reported doctor diagnosis of food allergy,
• Food sensitization diagnosed by either skin prick testing (SPT) or elevated food-specific serum immunoglobulin E (sIgE) levels, and
• Self-reported food allergies or sensitizations.
Study designs of interest:
• Systematic reviews with or without meta-analysis
• Randomized controlled trials
• Quasi-randomized controlled trials and controlled clinical trials (defined
as studies where the comparison group is not fully randomized)
• Controlled before-and-after studies (only where a clearly defined comparison group is available prospectively) and interrupted time series
studies
• Prospective cohort studies
• Interrupted time series studies
• Case-control studies
• Cross-sectional studies
Determinants and prevention factors of interest:
• Preconception factors
• Lactation
• Food introduction
• Microbiome/prebiotics/probiotics
• Hygiene hypothesis related factors (parity, living environment, pets, siblings, cesarean section delivery, prenatal and postnatal antibiotics use),
• Nutrient factors: vitamin D, fatty acid profiles (e.g., omega-3), folic acid
• Maternal dietary intake during pregnancy, lactation, child, adult
• Infant breastfeeding versus formula feeding
• Genetics, epigenetics (gene-environment interactions)
• Epithelial barrier function

448

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

BOX C-2
Study Exclusion Criteria
Studies seeking to prevent potential manifestations of food allergy (e.g.,
atopic eczema/dermatitis or asthma) but not including an explicit diagnosis of
sensitization to food or food allergy or studies investigating celiac disease were
excluded, as well as management guidance documents, narrative reviews, letters
to the editor, commentaries, studies that used animal or in vitro models, ecological
studies, and studies of transplant patients.

Systematic Reviews Searches:

Primary Studies Searches:

Citations identified in Medline and
Cochrane Systematic Review
Database published between January
2010 and September 2015
(n=387)

Citations identified in Medline,
EMBASE, and ISI Web of Science
published between January 2012
and September 2015
(n=2,069)

Duplicate citations across
databases removed
(n=148)
Additional citations identified
from the committee members
(n=17)

Unduplicated citations
(n=2,308)
Abstracts excluded after double
independent screening
(n=2,108)
Retrieved full-text articles for review
(n=217 primary studies)
Excluded articles that failed to
meet eligibility criteria
(n=161)
Articles included
(n=56)

Systematic reviews
(n=14)

Primary studies
(n=42)

FIGURE C-1 Literature search and study selection process.

449

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-2a BEGINS ON THE NEXT PAGE

450

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2a Microbial Exposure Hypothesis (Randomized Controlled
Trials)

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Population

N

Healthy, term
newborns

80 BF infants;
18 months
160 formula
fed infants (80
formula enriched
with the specific
mixture of oligo­
saccharides; 80
standard formula)

Prebiotics/Probiotics
Ivakhnenko and
Nyankovskyy,
2013

Randomized
controlled trial
(formula feeding)
+ 1 BF group
(nonrandomized),
Ukraine

NOTE: BF = breastfed; CI = confidence interval; GI = gastrointestinal; OFC = oral food
challenge.
a Bold indicates statistical significance at P<0.05. Results were reported as odds ratio (95%
confidence interval) unless otherwise noted. Adjusted results were extracted in the summary
table unless otherwise noted.

451

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition

Allergic reactions
to food (not
defined)
Allergic reactions
to cow milk
protein (not
defined)
GI symptoms of
food allergy (not
defined)

Exposure

BF (group 1)
versus formula
enriched with
oligosaccharides
(scGOS/lcFOS;
9:1; 8 g/L) (group
2) versus standard
formula (group 3)

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Allergic reactions
to food: 2/51
(3.92%) versus
3/62 (4.84%)
versus 9/53
(16.98%); P<0.05
Allergic reactions
to cow milk: 1/51
(1.96%) versus
2/62 (3.23%)
versus 8/53
(15.09%); P<0.05
GI symptoms of
food allergy: 1/51
(1.96%) versus
2/62 (3.23%)
versus 7/53
(13.21%); P<0.05

Comments

51 (63.7%), 62
(77.5%), and 53
(66.3%) infants in
groups 1, 2, and 3,
respectively, completed
the study. Analysis was
done in completers
only. Duration and
exclusivity of BF were
not measured.
Food allergy not
confirmed by OFC.

452

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2b Microbial Exposure Hypothesis (Observational Studies)

Author Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Prebiotics/Probiotics
Loo et al., 2014

Long-term
follow-up of a
RCT, Singapore

Asian infants at
risk for allergic
disease

226

3-5 years

West et al., 2013

Long-term
follow-up of an
RCT, Sweden

Healthy, term
infants with no
prior allergic
manifestations

121

8-9 years

Prospective
cohort,
Baltimore,
Boston, New
York City, St.
Louis

Children from
the Urban
Environment
and Childhood
Asthma
(URECA) study

516

1-5 years

Route of Delivery
McGowan et al.,
2015

453

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy or
Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Ever had food
allergy (history
of convincing
symptoms of food
allergy and the
presence of IgE
allergen) since
year 3

Exposure

Intervention: Cow
milk formula
supplemented
with probiotics
(BL999 and LPR)
from birth to age 6
months (N=117)

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Comments

RR=1.1 (0.1-17.0)

245 infants were
randomized; 220
(87%) completed
5-year follow-up. The
analysis was done in
226 children (number
of dropouts by groups
was not reported).

1.05 (0.14-7.73)

171/179 randomized
infants completed the
trial; 121 children
in the long-term
follow-up. More
children in the
placebo group
received antibiotics
during intervention
than probiotic group
(32.3% versus 16.9%,
P=0.05).

Control: Cow
milk formula
supplemented
without probiotics
(N=109)
IgE-associated food
allergy

Intervention:
Infant cereals
with addition of
probiotics (LF19
1 × 108 CFU per
serving) from 4
to age 13 months
(N=59)
Control: Infant
cereals without
addition of
probiotics (N=62)

Unadjusted analysis.

Food allergy
(N=51) or
sensitization
(N=286): sIgE to
milk, egg, peanut;
clinical history

(1) Caesarean
section (food
allergy versus not
allergic)
(2) Caesarean
section (food
sensitized versus
not sensitized)

(1) 23.5% versus
31.6%; P=0.31

Unadjusted analysis.

(2) 31.5% versus
30.9%; P=0.96

continued

454

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2b Continued
Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Peters et al.,
2015

Prospective
cohort,
Australia

Infants from
the HealthNuts
study

5,276

1 year

Grimshaw et al.,
2014

Prospective
nested casecontrol study,
UK

Cases: all infants
with food
allergy by age
of 2 years from
the Prevalence
of Infant Food
Allergy (PIFA)
study
Controls: agematched controls
from the PIFA
study

123 (41 with
food allergy;
82 controls)

1-2 years

Luccioli et al.,
2014

Prospective
cohort, US

Children who
participated
in the Infant
Feeding Practices
Study (IFPS) II

1,363

6 years

Author Year

455

APPENDIX C

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

IgE-mediated
food allergy =
positive OFC in the
presence of positive
test of sensitization
(SPT ≥2 mm or
sIgE ≥0.35 kua/L).
Separate analysis
for single egg
allergy (9% of the
cohort), multiple
food allergies
predominantly
peanut (3%
of the cohort),
and multiple
food allergies
predominantly egg
(2% of the cohort),
comparing to no
allergic disease at
baseline.

Caesarean section
versus vaginal birth

Single egg allergy:
1.02 (0.81-1.29)

Food allergy
determined by SPT,
physical exam,
clinical history,
sIgE, DBPCOFC

Birth by caesarean
section (cases
versus controls)

31.7% versus
24.4%; P=0.255

Physiciandiagnosed food
allergy as reported
by parent

Caesarean section
versus vaginal birth

1.37 (0.84-2.21)

Food Allergy or
Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Multiple food
allergies - peanut:
1.24 (0.86-1.78)
Multiple food
allergies - egg: 0.93
(0.56-1.60)

Comments
5,142 infants
underwent SPT to egg,
peanut, or sesame and
1,089 infants were
eligible for hospital
assessment, of whom
908 participated in
OFC.

Unadjusted analysis
except for pet
ownership.

continued

456

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2b Continued

Author Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Depner et al.,
2013

Prospective
cohort, Austria,
Finland,
France,
Germany,
Switzerland

Children from
the Protection
against AllergyStudy in Rural
Environments
(PASTURE)
birth cohort

686

Birth to 1 year

Pele et al., 2013

Prospective
cohort, France

Respondents
to the 2-year
follow-up FFQ
of the PELAGIE
mother–child
cohort study

1,487

2 years

Pyrhonen et al.,
2013

Retrospective
cohort study,
Finland

Children
identified from
the South
Karelian Allergy
Research Project
(SKARP), a
populationbased study
comprising all
children of a
given age range
and living in the
same province.

3,181

1-4 years

457

APPENDIX C

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

sIgE to food
allergens (hen egg,
cow milk, peanut,
hazlenut, carrot,
wheat flour)

Caesarean section

1.18 (0.69-2.03)

793 (378 farm and
415 nonfarm) children
were included in the
analyses, of whom 686
were included in IgE to
food allergens model.

Mother-reported
food allergy in
children (N=136):
37 had a medical
diagnosis of cow
milk allergy, 41 had
a medical diagnosis
of food allergy, and
22 of both, while
36 children had no
doctor’s diagnosis

Cesarean section
(yes versus no)

8.7% versus 9.1%;
P=0.10

Nonrespondents
(N=1,496) were
younger at the birth
of the child, less
educated, and more
likely to smoke.
These factors were
considered as
covariates in the paper.
Unadjusted analysis
results only.

Physiciandiagnosed allergic
manifestations:
positive specific
IgE test, SPT, open
food challenge (did
not specify which
foods)

Caesarean section

1.15 (0.80-1.63)

Large nonresponse
rate.

Food Allergy or
Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Comments

continued

458

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2b Continued

Author Year

Study Design,
Country

Dowhower
Karpa et al.,
2012

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Population

N

Retrospective
case-control
study, US

Cases: children
visiting an
allergy specialty
clinic for a food
allergy–related
concern who
were also
born at the
institution’s
medical center.
Age- and
sex-matched
controls:
children visiting
primary care
practice who
were also
born at the
institution’s
medical center.

99 case; 192
controls

No data

Prospective
nested casecontrol study,
UK

Cases: all infants
with food allergy
by age of 2 years
from the PIFA
study
Controls: agematched controls
from the PIFA
study

123 (41 with
food allergy;
82 controls)

1-2 years

Antibiotics Use
Grimshaw et al.,
2014

459

APPENDIX C

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

ICD-9-CM coding
consistent with
food-related
allergic reactions
and a confirmed
presence of
food allergies
documented by
either a positive
serum specific IgE
test or positive SPT

Caesarean (cases
versus controls)

32.2% versus
33.9%; P=0.79

Retrospective chart
review. Possible
selection bias.
Unadjusted analysis
results only.

Food allergy
determined by SPT,
physical exam,
clinical history,
sIgE, double-blind
placebo controlled
food challenge

Maternal antibiotic
use (cases versus
controls)

No significant
associations
during or after
pregnancy or while
breastfeeding

Unadjusted analysis
except for pet
ownership.

Food Allergy or
Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Comments

continued

460

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2b Continued

Author Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Metsala et al.,
2013

Prospective
nested casecontrol study,
Finland

Cases: infants
who had
received a special
reimbursement
for the cost of
special infant
formulas based
on diagnosed
cow milk allergy.
Controls:
randomly
selected and
matched for date
of birth, sex,
and the hospital
district of birth.

16,237 casecontrol pairs

0-2 years

Dowhower
Karpa et al.,
2012

Retrospective
case-control
study, US

Cases: children
visiting an
allergy specialty
clinic for a
food allergyrelated concern
who were also
born at the
institution’s
medical center.
Age-and­
sex matched
controls:
children visiting
primary care
practice who
were also
born at the
institution’s
medical center.

99 case; 192
controls

No data

461

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy or
Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Exposure

Pediatric
certification of
cow milk allergy
based on clinical
exam, symptoms,
elimination diet,
SPT, and elevated
serum-specific IgE
or open challenge
test

(1) Maternal use of
antibiotics before
pregnancy
(2) Maternal use of
antibiotics during
pregnancy
(3) Child’s use of
antibiotics from
birth to 1 month

ICD-9-CM coding
consistent with
food-related
allergic reactions
and a confirmed
presence of food
allergy documented
by either a positive
serum specific IgE
test or positive SPT

(1) Neonatal
antibiotics (cases
versus controls)
(2) Peripartum
antibiotics (cases
versus controls)

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Comments

(1) 1.26 (1.20­
1.33)

(2) 1.21 (1.14­
1.28)

(3) 1.71
(1.59-1.84)

(1) 16.2% versus
12.5%; P=0.39

Retrospective chart
review.
Possible selection bias.

(2) 28.3% versus
28.1%; P=1.0

Unadjusted analysis
results only.

continued

462

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2b Continued

Author Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Exposure to Animals
Martin et al.,
2015

Prospective
cohort,
Australia

Infants from
the HealthNuts
study

4,453 (2,795
without
eczema;
1,903 with
eczema)

1 year

Peters et al.,
2015

Prospective
cohort,
Australia

Infants from
the HealthNuts
study

5,276

1 year

463

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy or
Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

SPT or sIgE, OFC
(egg white, peanut,
sesame) or parent
report of recent
immediate-type
reaction

(1) Pet dog among
infants without
eczema; among
infants with
eczema
(2) Pet cat among
infants without
eczema; among
infants with
eczema

(1) 0.9 (0.6-1.5);
0.7 (0.5-0.9)

IgE-mediated
food allergy =
positive OFC in the
presence of positive
test of sensitization
(SPT ≥2 mm or
sIgE ≥0.35 kua/L).
Separate analysis
for single egg
allergy (9% of the
cohort), multiple
food allergies,
predominantly
peanut (3%
of the cohort),
and multiple
food allergies
predominantly egg
(2% of the cohort),
compared to no
allergic disease at
baseline.

(1) Dogs allowed
inside the home
versus no dogs

(1) Single egg
allergy: 0.76
(0.56-1.05)
Multiple food
allergies - peanut:
0.40 (0.21-0.73)
Multiple food
allergies - egg: 0.59
(0.26-1.34)

(2) Dogs outside
only versus no
dogs

(2) Single egg
allergy: 1.56
(1.10-2.21)
Multiple food
allergies - peanut:
0.82 (0.44-1.54)
Multiple food
allergies - egg: 0.39
(0.13-1.18)

(3) Pet cats versus
no dogs

(2) 0.9 (0.5-1.6);
0.6 (0.4-0.8)

Comments

Same cohort as Peters
et al., 2015, but
different analyses and
outcome definitions.
[Note: cesarean
section results were
not extracted for this
study because for this
factor the analysis was
unadjusted.]
5,142 infants
underwent SPT to egg,
peanut or sesame and
1,089 infants were
eligible for hospital
assessment, of whom
908 participated in
OFC.

(3) Single egg
allergy: 0.80
(0.57-1.12)
Multiple food
allergies - peanut:
0.83 (0.47-1.47)
Multiple food
allergies - egg: 0.86
(0.38-1.91)

continued

464

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2b Continued

Author Year

Study Design,
Country

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Population

N

Grimshaw et al.,
2014

Prospective
nested casecontrol study,
UK

Cases: all infants
with food allergy
by age of 2 years
from the PIFA
study
Controls: agematched controls
from the PIFA
study

123 (41 with
food allergy;
82 controls)

1-2 years

Stelmach et al.,
2014

Prospective
cohort, Poland

Children from
the Polish
Mother and
Child Cohort
Study (REPRO_
PL cohort)

501

1-2 years

Depner et al.,
2013

Prospective
cohort, Austria,
Finland,
France,
Germany,
Switzerland

Children from
the Protection
against
PASTURE birth
cohort

686

Birth to 1 year

Goldberg et al.,
2013

Prospective
case-cohort
study, Israel

Cases: IgE­
cow milk
allergy children
identified from
a cohort study
(Katz, 2010)
Controls:
healthy children
randomly chosen
from the cohort

66 cases
156 controls

2-3 years

465

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy or
Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Comments

Food allergy
determined by SPT,
physical exam,
clinical history,
sIgE, DBPCOFC

Pet ownership (yes
versus no)

1.275 (0.49-3.33)

Food allergy ever
diagnosed by
doctor according
to international
guidelines

Pets at home
during pregnancy
(yes versus no)

1.48 (1.02-2.16)

Frequency of cleaning
was not associated
with food allergy and
was dropped out from
multivariate model.

sIgE to food
allergens (hen egg,
cow milk, peanut,
hazlenut, carrot,
wheat flour)

(1) Early contact
with sheep, goats,
hares

(1) 0.92
(0.75-1.13)

(2) Farming

(2) 2.11
(1.33-3.34)

793 (378 farm and
415 nonfarm) children
were included in the
analyses, of whom 686
were included in IgE to
food allergens model.

IgE-mediated
cow milk allergy
defined by a
suggestive history
of an immediate
response, a positive
SPT response, and,
in most cases, a
positive challenge
result to cow milk
protein

Pets in home (cases
versus controls)

26.2% versus
30.1%; P=0.72

Unadjusted analysis.

continued

466

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-2b Continued

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Pele et al., 2013

Prospective
cohort, France

Respondents
to the 2-year
follow-up FFQ
of the PELAGIE
mother–child
cohort study

1,487

2 years

Koplin et al.,
2012

Prospective
cohort,
Australia

Infants from
the HealthNuts
study

4,963

1 year

Author Year

Study Design,
Country

NOTE: CI = confidence interval; DBPCOFC = double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food
challenge; FFQ = food frequency questionnaire; IgE = immunoglobulin E; OFC = oral food
challenge; RAST = radioallergosorbent test; RR = relative risk; sIgE = food-specific serum
IgE; SPT = skin prick test; UK = United Kingdom; US = United States.
a Bold indicates statistical significance at P<0.05. Results were reported as odds ratio (95%
confidence interval) unless otherwise noted. Adjusted results were extracted in the summary
table unless otherwise noted.

467

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy or
Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Exposure

Mother-reported
food allergy in
children (N=136):
37 had a medical
diagnosis of cow
milk allergy, 41 a
medical diagnosis
of food allergy, and
22 of both, while
36 children had no
doctor’s diagnosis

Farm animal
contact (yes versus
no)

IgE-mediated egg
allergy: Allergic
on formal egg
challenge or
previous history
of clear reaction
to egg occurring
within 1 month of
a positive SPT or
RAST

(1) Dog outside
only versus no dog
(2) Dog allowed
inside versus no
dog
(3) Cat outside
only versus no cat
(4) Cat allowed
inside versus no cat

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy
8.9% versus 9.1%;
P=0.88

Comments
Nonrespondents
(N=1,496) were
younger at the birth
of the child, less
educated, and more
likely to smoke.
These factors were
considered as
covariates in the paper.
Unadjusted analysis
results only.

(1) 1.09
(0.75-1.57)
(2) 0.72
(0.52-0.99)
(3) 0.93
(0.49-1.77)
(4) 0.75
(0.52-1.09)

Same cohort as Peters
et al., 2015 but
different analyses and
outcome definitions.

468

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3a Allergen Avoidance Hypothesis (Randomized Controlled
Trials)

Author Year

Study Design,
Country

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Population

N

Randomized
controlled trial
(formula feeding)
+ 1 BF group
(nonrandomized),
Ukraine

Healthy, term
newborns

80 BF infants;
160 formula
fed infants
(80 formula
enriched with
the specific
mixture of
oligosaccharides;
80 standard
formula)

18 months

RCT, Australia

Infants with a
family history
of allergic
disease

620

6, 12, and 24
months

Breastfeeding
Ivakhnenko
and
Nyankovskyy,
2013

Infant Formula
Lowe et al.,
2011

NOTE: BF = breastfed; CI = confidence interval; GI = gastrointestinal; pHWF = partially
hydrolyzed whey formula.
a Bold indicates statistical significance at P<0.05. Results were reported as odds ratio (95%
confidence interval) unless otherwise noted. Adjusted results were extracted in the summary
table unless otherwise noted.

469

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy or
Sensitization Outcome
Definition
Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Allergic reactions to BF (group 1) versus
food (not defined)
formula enriched
Allergic reactions to with oligosaccharides
cow milk protein (not (scGOS/lcFOS; 9:1; 8
defined)
g/L) (group 2) versus
GI symptoms of food standard formula
allergy (not defined) (group 3)

Allergic reactions to 51 (63.7%), 62
(77.5%), and 53
food: 2/51 (3.92%)
versus 3/62 (4.84%) (66.3%) infants in
versus 9/53 (16.98%); groups 1, 2, and 3,
respectively, completed
P<0.05
the study. Analysis was
done in completers
Allergic reactions
only. Duration and
to cow milk: 1/51
(1.96%) versus 2/62 exclusivity of BF were
(3.23%) versus 8/53 not measured.
(15.09%); P<0.05
Food allergy not
GI symptoms of food confirmed by OFC.
allergy: 1/51 (1.96%)
versus 2/62 (3.23%)
versus 7/53 (13.21%);
P<0.05

Food reaction, SPT
(milk, egg, peanut)

Positive SPT to cow
milk within first 2
years:

Soy-based formula,
pHWF, or cow milk
formula at cessation
of breastfeeding

pHWF versus CMF:
0.79 (0.35-1.77)
Soy formula versus
CMF: 0.78 (0.32-1.92)
Any food reaction:
pHWF versus CMF:
0.95 (0.51-1.75)
Soy formula versus
CMF: 1.21 (0.67-2.19)

Comments

470

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3b Allergen Avoidance (Observational Studies)

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Maternal Intake During Pregnancy and Lactation
Bunyavanich
et al., 2014

Prospective
cohort, US

Mother-child
pairs in the
Project Viva
prebirth cohort
recruited
from a large
multidisciplinary
practice

1,277
mother–child
pairs

7.9 years (mean)

471

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition

Food allergy to
peanut, milk,
wheat, egg, and/
or soy based
on sIgE to the
particular food and
EpiPen prescribed.
Food allergy to
peanut was more
specifically defined
by parent report
of convincing
symptoms of a
peanut allergic
reaction (history
of peanut allergy
AND a cutaneous,
respiratory,
cardiovascular,
gastrointestinal
and/or anaphylactic
symptom following
peanut ingestion).

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Maternal intake
(total servings per
day as measured
by FFQ) during
first and second
trimester of:

First trimester
(1) 0.53 (0.30-0.94)
(2) 0.90 (0.50-1.62)
(3) 1.26 (0.75-2.12)
(4) 0.76 (0.28-2.08)
(5) 0.61 (0.16-2.31)

(1) peanut
(2) milk
(3) wheat
(4) egg
(5) soy

Second trimester
(1) 0.88 (0.61-1.27)
(2) 1.47 (0.91-2.37)
(3) 1.07 (0.62-1.85)
(4) 0.77 (0.28-2.15)
(5) 1.18 (0.95-1.48)

Comments

All ORs are adjusted
for child age, sex,
breastfeeding history,
parental atopy, and
maternal education.

Intake reported as
z-scores

continued

472

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3b Continued

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Frazier et al.,
2014

Prospective
cohort, US

Population

N

Boys and girls
(born between
1990 and 1994)
participating in
the Growing Up
Today Study 2
(GUTS2) and
their mothers.

8,205
mother–child
pairs

(These are
children of
women in the
Nurse’s Health
Study II.)

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained
Unclear

473

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
Peanut or tree nut
(walnut, almond,
pistachio, cashew,
pecan, hazelnut,
macadamia, and
Brazil nut) allergy
in offspring based
on maternal
confirmation
of food allergy
diagnosis, review of
physical copies of
laboratory results
of testing (SPT,
sIgE, OFC) by two
board-certified
pediatricians, and
confirmation of
food allergy in
writing from the
child’s treating
physician

Exposure
Peripregnancy
maternal
consumption of
peanuts or tree
nuts:
(1) <1 serving/
month
(2) 1-3 servings/
month
(3) 1-4 servings/
week
(4) ≥5 servings/
week

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy
Multivariable OR
(1) reference group
(2) 0.90 (0.55-1.48)
(3) 0.65 (0.43-0.97)
(4) 0.58 (0.34-0.99)
Ptrend=0.04

Comments
The dietary
questionnaires were
not specific for the
actual dates of the
pregnancy but were
chosen as the one
completed closest to
the child’s date of
birth. Only 45% of the
dietary questionnaires
were completed during
the pregnancy; 76%
were within 1 year of
the pregnancy.
Multivariable models
control for continuous
maternal age, maternal
history of non-nut
food allergy, maternal
allergic rhinitis,
eczema, or asthma,
and season at child’s
birth (spring or
summer versus fall or
winter).

continued

474

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3b Continued

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Pele et al.,
2013

Prospective
cohort, France

Population

N

Respondents
to the 2-year
follow-up FFQ
of the PELAGIE
mother–child
cohort study

1,500
mother–child
pairs

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained
2 years

475

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
Mother-reported
food allergy in
children (N=136):
37 had a medical
diagnosis of cow
milk allergy, 41 a
medical diagnosis
of food allergy, and
22 of both, while
36 children had no
doctor’s diagnosis

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

(1) Maternal
pre-pregnancy
consumption of
fish (<1 time/month
versus 1-4 times/
month)

(1) 1.27 (0.72-2.24)

(2) Maternal
pre-pregnancy
consumption of
fish (<1 time/
month versus ≥2
times/week)

(2) 1.48 (0.80-2.76)

(3) 1.62 (1.11-2.37)
(3) Maternal
pre-pregnancy
consumption of
shellfish (<1 time/
month versus
≥1 time/month)

All exposures
measured by FFQ

Comments
Nonrespondent
mothers (N=1,496)
were younger at the
birth of the child,
less educated, and
more likely to smoke
than the participants
(N=1,500). These
factors were
considered as
covariates in the paper.
ORs adjusted for:
mother’s age, maternal
education, folic acid
supplementation,
familial history
of asthma/allergy,
child’s sex, small­
for-gestational age,
infant’s method of
feeding, day care
attendance, postnatal
exposure to tobacco,
and child’s age at
follow-up.

continued

476

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3b Continued

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Prospective
cohort,
Baltimore,
Boston, New
York City, St.
Louis

Children from
the Urban
Environment
and Childhood
Asthma
(URECA) study

516

1-5 years

Breastfeeding
McGowan et
al., 2015

477

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition

Food allergy
(N=51) or
sensitization
(N=286): sIgE to
milk, egg, peanut;
clinical history

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

(1) Ever BF

(1) Food allergy
versus no food
allergy: 35/51
(68.8%) versus
193/377 (52.9%);
P=0.05
Food sensitization
versus no food
sensitization:
161/286 (58.3%)
versus 121/230
(53.8%); P=0.35

(2) BF at 3 months

(2) Food allergy
versus no food
allergy: 16/51
(32.7%) versus
76/377 (22.8%);
P=0.18
Food sensitization
versus no food
sensitization:
64/286 (25.1%)
versus 48/230
(23.4%); P=0.76

Comments

Of the 609 children
initially enrolled, 516
(85%) were included.
Unadjusted analysis.

continued

478

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3b Continued

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Peters et al.,
2015

Prospective
cohort,
Australia

Infants from
the HealthNuts
study

5,276

1 year

Grimshaw et
al., 2013

Prospective
nested casecontrol study,
UK

Cases: all
infants with
food allergy
by age of 2
years from the
Prevalence of
Infant Food
Allergy (PIFA)
study
Controls:
age-matched
controls from
the PIFA study

123 (41 with
food allergy;
82 controls)

1-2 years

Author, Year

479

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Comments

IgE-mediated
food allergy =
positive OFC in the
presence of positive
test of sensitization
(SPT ≥2 mm or
sIgE ≥0.35 kua/L).
Separate analysis
for single egg
allergy (9% of the
cohort), multiple
food allergies
predominantly
peanut (3%
of the cohort),
and multiple
food allergies
predominantly egg
(2% of the cohort),
comparing to no
allergic disease at
baseline

Duration of BF (up
to 12 months)

Single egg allergy:
1.02 (0.99-1.04)
Multiple
food allergy
(predominantly
peanut): 1.00
(0.96-1.05)
Multiple
food allergy
(predominantly
egg): 1.17
(1.09-1.24)

5,142 infants
underwent SPT to egg,
peanut, or sesame and
1,089 infants were
eligible for hospital
assessment, of whom
908 participated in
OFC.
Multinomial logistic
regression was used to
determine risk factors
for each class, also
weighted for posterior
probabilities of class
membership.
Three separate
multivariable models
were fitted for the
three categories
of risk factors
(parental, infant, and
environmental).

Food allergy
determined by SPT,
physical exam,
clinical history,
sIgE, DBPCOFC

(1) BF duration,
median weeks

(1) Cases versus
controls: 21.0 (3.0­
30.5) versus 24.0
(7.0-31.0); P=0.295

Only age adjusted
(matching factor).

(2) Exclusive BF,
median weeks

(3) % BF initiation

(2) Cases versus
controls: 5.0 (2.8­
16.3) versus 8.5
(4.0-15.0); P=0.933
(3) Cases versus
controls: 92.7%
versus 96.3%;
P=0.21

continued

480

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3b Continued

Author, Year
Liao et al.,
2014

Study Design,
Country
Prospective
cohort,
Taiwan

Population

N

Infants ≥37
weeks from the
The Prediction
of Allergy in
Taiwanese
Children
(PATCH) cohort

258 (238,
226, 217,
210, and 198
completed
6, 12, 18,
24, and 36
months of
follow-ups)

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained
6, 12, 18, 24, and
36 months

481

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
sIgE antibody
included a mix
of six common
allergens:
Dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus (Dp),
Dermatophagoides
farinae (Df), egg
white, cow milk,
Cladosporium
herbarum
(Hormodendrum),
and wheat.
Participants were
characterized as
atopic or been
sensitized if any of
the sIgE level was
greater than 0.35
IU/ml.

Exposure
(1) Exclusive BF ≥4
versus <4 months

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy
(1) Cow milk
sensitization at
6, 12, 18, 24, 36
months: 1.0 (0.3,
3.3); 0.2 (0.07-0.5;
0.2 (0.07-0.5);
0.3 (0.1-0.7); 0.6
(0.2-1.7)
Egg sensitization
at 6, 12, 18, 24,
36 months: 1.3
(0.5-3.5); 1.4 (0.5­
3.7); 1.6 (0.7-3.8);
1.6 (0.7-3.7); 0.7
(0.2-2.0)

(2) Partial BF

Comments
Of the original
258 neonates,
blood samples and
questionnaires were
available from 238
infants at the age
of 6 months. 226,
217, 210, and 198
children completed
12, 18, 24 and 36
months of follow-ups,
respectively.
Unadjusted analysis
only.

(2) Cow milk
sensitization: There
was a trend of
reduced risk for
cow milk protein
sensitization as
duration of partial
breastfeeding
was increased;
the result was
not statistically
significant

continued

482

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3b Continued
Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Luccioli et al.,
2014

Prospective
cohort, US

Children who
participated
in the Infant
Feeding
Practices Study
(IFPS) II

1,363 (823
high-risk
group)

6 years

Mailhol et al.
2014

Cross-sectional
study, France

Children (0 to
18 years of age)
with atopic
dermatitis seen
consecutively
at multi­
disciplinary
clinics from
May 2002 to
December 2008

386

0 to 18 years

483

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
Total
pFA (all children
with a current
physician diagnosis
of food allergy
at age 6 years).
(N=89, 7%)

Exposure
Exclusive BF
duration 1-3
months, ≥4 months
versus 0 months
(reference group)

New pFA (subset
of children with
physician diagnosis
of food allergy
at age 6 years but
with no diagnosis
before 1 year of
age) (N=71, 5.2%)

Total pFA:
Exclusive BF 1-3
month = 0.72
(0.42-1.23)
Exclusive BF ≥4
months = 0.69
(0.36-1.29)
New pFA:
Exclusive BF 1-3
month = 0.78
(0.43-1.38)
Exclusive BF ≥4
months = 0.51
(0.24-1.03)

Comments
Adjusted for mother’s
education, race,
income, child’s gender,
parity, type of delivery,
family history of
food allergy, family
history of other atopy,
reported eczema
before age 1 year,
maternal tobacco
smoke, other tobacco
smoke exposure in
home, complementary
food introduction by
infant age.

High risk pFA:
Exclusive BF 1-3
month = 0.81
(0.42-1.51)
Exclusive BF ≥4
months = 0.58
(0.26-1.25)

High-risk pFA
(subset of children
with pFA at age 6
years and report
of any of the
following atopic
risk factors: family
history of food
allergy, family
history of other
atopy, or eczema
before age 1 year)
SPT. Positive
(histamine 10
mg/mL
[Stallergenes,
Antony, France])
and negative
controls and
fresh foods or
commercial
extracts in the case
of food items with
histamine-releasing
properties were
used

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Exclusive BF yes
versus no

1.8 (0.9-3.5)

Among the 386
evaluated children,
food allergy was
diagnosed in 69
children, of whom 26
children had a reaction
to more than one food
item. Duration of
exclusive BF was not
measured.
Note: exclusive BF
was dropped out in
the final model.
continued

484

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-3b Continued

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Stelmach et
al., 2014

Prospective
cohort, Poland

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Children from
the Polish
Mother and
Child Cohort
Study (REPRO_
PL cohort)

501

1-2 years

NOTE: BF = breastfed; CI = confidence interval; FFQ = food frequency questionnaire; IgE =
immunoglobulin E; OFC = oral food challenge; OR = odds ratio; pFA = probable food allergy;
RCT = randomized controlled trial; sIgE = food-specific serum IgE; SPT = skin prick test; UK
= United Kingdom; US = United States.
a Bold indicates statistical significance at P<0.05. Results were reported as odds ratio (95%
confidence interval) unless otherwise noted. Adjusted results were extracted in the summary
table unless otherwise noted.

485

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
Food allergy ever
diagnosed by
doctor according
to international
guidelines

Exposure
Duration of BF (up
to 12 months)

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy
0.88 (0.82-0.95)

Comments
A stepwise forward
procedure was
then used to select
variables.

486

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-4a Dual Antigen Hypothesis (Randomized Controlled Trials)

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Timing of Introduction of Solid Foods and Infant Feeding
DuToit et al.,
2016

RCT, UK
(follow-up to
primary trial
[DuToit et al.,
2015])

Children,
median age 61.3
months, who
had completed
the primary trial.
Half were in the
peanut-avoidance
group; the
other half were
in the peanutconsumption
group.

628

72 months

Perkin et al.,
2016

RCT, UK

Exclusively
breastfed infants
age 3 months
in the general
population

1,303

3 years

487

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition

DBPCOFC to
peanut

Exposure

12 months of peanut
avoidance
(peanut-avoidance
versus peanutconsumption group
based on primary
trial)

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Comments

Prevalence of peanut
allergy at 72 months:
Peanut-avoidance
group: 18.6%
Peanut-consumption
group: 4.8%
P<0.001

DBPCOFC
(peanut, cooked
egg, cow milk,
sesame, whitefish,
and wheat)

Early Introduction
Group (EIG): early
introduction of 6
allergenic foods
Or
Standard
Introduction Group
(SIG): exclusive BF
to ~6 months of
age. After 6 months,
the consumption of
allergenic foods was
allowed according to
parental discretion.

Intention to Treat
Analysis
• Food allergy
to ≥1 allergen
(EIG versus
SIG); RR=0.80
(0.51-1.25)
• Food allergy
to individual
allergens: all
nonsignificant

Low adherence to
the protocol in the
EIG (42.8%).

Per Protocol analysis
• Food allergy
to ≥1 allergen
(EIG versus
SIG): RR=0.33
(0.13-0.83)
• Food allergy
to peanut (EIG
versus SIG):
RR=0
• Food allergy to
egg (EIG versus
SIG): RR=0.25
(0.08-0.82)
No significant effects
with respect to milk,
sesame, fish, or
wheat
continued

488

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-4a Continued

Author, Year
DuToit et al.,
2015

Study Design,
Country
RCT, UK

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Infants, age least
4 months and less
than 11 months at
enrollment with
severe eczema, egg
allergy, or both

640

60 months

489

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
Clinical history,
SPT, OFC,
DBPCOFC, sIgE
(peanut)
530 had negative
SPT at baseline
98 had positive
SPT at baseline

Exposure
Peanut intake
(avoidance versus
consumption)

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Comments

Prevalence of peanut
allergy at 60 months:
SPT Negative Group
13.7% avoidance
group
1.9% consumption
group
(P<0.001)
(86.1% relative
reduction in the
prevalence of peanut
allergy)
SPT Positive Group
35.3% avoidance
group
10.6% consumption
group
(P=0.004)
(70.0% relative
reduction
in the prevalence of
peanut allergy)
No significant
between-group
difference in the
incidence of serious
adverse events

continued

490

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-4a Continued

Author, Year
Palmer et al.,
2013

Study Design,
Country
RCT, Australia

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Singleton term
infants with
symptoms of
moderate-to-severe
eczema. Infants
who had begun
solids before 4
months of age
or who had any
previous known
direct ingestion of
egg were excluded

86

12 months

49 egg group
37 rice group
(control)

NOTE: CI = confidence interval; EIG = Early Introduction Group; IgE = immunoglobulin E;
OFC = oral food challenge; SIG = Standard Introduction Group; sIgE = food-specific serum
IgE; SPT = skin prick test; UK = United Kingdom; US = United States.
a Bold indicates statistical significance at P<0.05. Results were reported as odds ratio (95%
confidence interval) unless otherwise noted. Adjusted results were extracted in the summary
table unless otherwise noted.

491

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
IgE-mediated egg
allergy, as defined
based on the results
of an observed
pasteurized raw
egg challenge and
SPT

Exposure
1 teaspoon of
pasteurized raw
whole egg powder
versus rice powder
(control) daily from
4 to 8 months of age
Cooked egg was
introduced to both
groups after an
observed feed at 8
months

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy
RR: 0.65 (0.38-1.11)

Comments
At 4 months
of age, before
any known egg
ingestion, 36%
(24/67) of infants
already had eggspecific IgE levels
of greater than
0.35 kilounits of
antibody (kUA)/L.
Egg-specific
IgG4 levels were
significantly
(P<0.001) greater
in the egg group
at both 8 and 12
months.

492

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-4b Antigen Exposure Hypothesis (Observational Studies)

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome
Was
Ascertained

Diet Diversity
Grimshaw et al.,
2014

Nested case
control, UK

Infants from the PIFA
Study who had been
diagnosed as having a
food allergy and their 2
age-matched controls

41 cases
82 controls

2 years

Roduit et al.,
2014

Prospective
cohort, Europe

Children from rural
areas in five European
countries

856

Up to age 6
years

NOTE: CI = confidence interval; DBPCOFC = double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food
challenge; sIgE = food-specific serum IgE; SPT = skin prick testing; UK = United Kingdom.
a Bold indicates statistical significance at P<0.05. Results were reported as odds ratio (95%
confidence interval) unless otherwise noted. Adjusted results were extracted in the summary
table unless otherwise noted.

493

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome Definition

Parent report,
physical exam, SPT,
sIgE, exclusion
diet, DBPCOFC

Exposure

Dietary patterns
during first year
of life

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Scores were
significantly
different between
the food allergic
and control infants
(P=0.002) for
component 1 (diet
high in fruits and
vegetables)

Comments

Early infant feeding
patterns did not have
an association with the
later development of
food allergy. Children
who did not have a
food allergy by the
age of 2 years had a
dietary pattern in later
infancy characterized
by higher intake of
fruits, vegetables,
and home-prepared
foods as compared to
children who had a
food allergy.
Unadjusted analysis
only.

Parent report of
doctor diagnosis;
sIgE (hen egg, cow
milk, peanut,
hazelnut, carrot,
and wheat flour)

Food diversity
during first year
of life
(1) 0-3 items
(2) 4-5 items
(3) 6 items (ref)
(4) diversity score,
continuous

(1) 4.43 1.62-12.10
(2) 1.85 1.02-3.35
(3) 1
(4) 0.70
(0.57-0.86)

Adjusted for center,
farmer, parents with
allergy, sex, breastfeeding, siblings, and
maternal education.

494

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-5 Nutritional Immunomodulation Hypothesis (Observational
Studies)

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Lipids/Omega-3 Fatty Acids (see systematic reviews below)
Vitamin D
Koplin et al.,
2016

Prospective
cohort,
Australia

Infants
participating in
the HealthNuts
study

5,276

1 year

Baek et al.,
2014

Cross­
sectional,
Korea

Children with
atopic
dermatitis or
suspected food
allergy, who
had not been
on vitamin
supplementation
for at least 1
month before the
study

226

3-24 months

495

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition

Exposure

SPT, sIgE, OFC

Serum 25(OH)D3
≤50 nmol/L
= vitamin D
insufficiency
51-74 nmol/L =
intermediate
vitamin D

History of
acute reaction
+ sIgE ≥0.35
kU/L or >95%
predictive
decision points

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Infants with GG genotype
(insufficient versus
intermediate):
6.0 (0.9-38.9)
Infants with GT/TT
phenotypes (insufficient
versus intermediate): 0.7
(0.2-2.0)

≥75 nmol/L =
high vitamin D

Infants with GG genotype
(high versus intermediate):
4.0 (1.3-12.9)

Serum 25(OH)D3

Deficient versus sufficient

Deficiency: <20ng/
mL

Food allergens: 5.0
(1.8-14.1)

Insufficiency:
20-29ng/mL

Milk: 10.4 (3.3-32.7)
Wheat: 4.2 (1.1-15.8)

Sufficiency:
≥30ng/mL

Comments

Adjusted for infants’
consumption of egg
and formula use and
parents’ country of
birth and used a
seasonally adjusted
measure of serum
25(OH)D3.

Vitamin D
deficiency increased
the risk of
sensitization to food
allergens, especially
to milk and wheat.
The Scoring Atopic
Dermatitis index
was independently
related to 25(OH)D
levels after adjusting
for the level of
sensitization.

continued

496

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-5 Continued

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Longitudinal
Study, Japan

Infants with
facial eczema and
their mothers

164

3-24 months

Wawro et al.,
2014

Crosssectional,
Germany

Samples from
two German
birth cohort
studies

2,815

10 years

Allen et al.,
2013

Crosssectional,
Australia

Infants from
HealthNuts
population-based
cohort

5,276

1 year

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Norizoe et al.,
2014

497

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition

Exposure

Doctordiagnosed
allergic
incidents,
including
atopic
dermatitis,
food allergy
with or
without being
positive for IgE
food allergens,
or wheeze or
asthma with
or without
being positive
for IgE inhaled
allergens

Maternal vitamin
D (800 IU/day)
supplement

sIgE >0.35 kU/l

Serum 25(OH)D
Q1: <57.9
(nmol/L)
Q2: 57.9- <71.5
Q3: 71.5- <87.8
Q4: ≥87.8
Continuous
variable

OFCs + SPT/
sIgE ≥0.35
kU/L

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy
RR=3.42 (1.02-11.77)

Comments
Vitamin D
supplementation
may not decrease
the severity of
infantile eczema at
3 months of age,
but may rather
increase the risk of
later food allergy up
to 2 years of age.

Unadjusted analysis
only.

Vitamin D ≥50
nmol/L
(insufficiency)
(1) All infants
(2) Infants with
one or both
parents born
overseas
(3) Infants with
both parents born
in Australia

1
0.91 (0.67-1.25)
1.25 (0.93-1.69)
1.30 (0.97-1.75)
1.07 (1.02-1.11)

Lifetime prevalence
also was
significantly related
to vitamin D status.

Any food allergy versus
none:
(1) 1.29 (0.51-3.25)
(2) 0.39 (0.08-1.76)
(3) 3.08 (1.10-8.59)

Peanut allergy versus none
(infants with both parents
born in Australia):
11.51 (2.01-65.79)
Egg allergy versus none
(infants with both parents
born in Australia):
3.79 (1.19-12.08)
continued

498

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-5 Continued

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Liu et al.,
2013

Prospective
longitudinal
cohort study,
US

Children in the
Boston Birth
cohort

460

0-3 years

Weisse et al.,
2013

Prospective
longitudinal
cohort study,
Germany

Mother–child
pairs from the
Lifestyle and
environmental
factors and
their Influence
on Newborns
Allergy risk
(LINA) cohort
study

378

First 2 years

499

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
sIgE >0.35 kU/l

Parental report
of a doctor
diagnosis.
tIgE levels >0.7
kU/l in cord
blood and >3.8
kU/l at age of
1 or 2 yrs, or
sIgE >0.35 kU/l

Exposure
Vitamin D (ng/ml)
cord blood/
postnatal
≥11 / ≥30
(reference)
≥11 / <30
<11 / ≥30
<11 / <30

Maternal vitamin
D
Median = 22.2 ng/
ml (55.41 nmol/
ml)

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy
All children:

1
0.73 (0.42-1.29)
0.90 (0.54-1.51)
2.03 (1.02-4.04)

There was no
association between
low vitamin D
status and food
sensitization at any
single time point
alone.

Children with C allele of
rs2243250:
1
0.52 (0.23–1.18)
1.26 (0.65–2.43)
3.23 (1.37-7.60)

Adjusted for a
child’s sex and
ancestry proportion,
breastfeeding,
postnatal maternal
smoking, household
income, and
maternal age.

1st year of life:
1.27 (0.67–2.40)

Adjusted for sex,
number of siblings,
increased cord
blood tIgE levels,
family atopy history,
cotinine levels
during pregnancy,
breastfeeding, UV
intensity at birth
and vitamin D
supplementation
within the first year
of life.

2nd year of life:
3.66 (1.36–9.87)
2-year lifetime period:
1.91 (1.09–3.37)

Cord blood
vitamin D
Median = 10.95
ng/ml (27.33
nmol/ml)

Comments

1st year of life:
0.92 (0.45–1.85)
2nd year of life:
4.65 (1.50–14.48)
2-year lifetime period:
1.70 (0.92-3.14)

continued

500

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-5 Continued

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Jones et al.,
2012

Prospective
longitudinal
cohort study,
Australia

High-risk infants

231

12 months

Liu et al.,
2011

Prospective
longitudinal
birth cohort,
US

Mother-infant
pairs in the
Boston Birth
Cohort

649 children

Around 2 years

Lipids/Omega-3 Fatty Acids (see systematic reviews below)
Folate
Okupa et al.,
2013

Cohort study,
US

Children at
high risk of
developing
asthma and
allergic disease

138

2, 4, 6, and 8
years

501

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
SPT
History of
immediate
symptoms +
SPT

sIgE (milk, egg
white, peanut,
soy, shrimp,
walnut, cod
fish, and
wheat)

Exposure

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Cord blood
vitamin D

Risk of allergen
sensitization: 1.0 (0.9-1.01)

<50 nmol/L
versus ≥75 nmol/L
(reference)

Risk of developing IgE­
mediated food
allergy:
1.00 (0.99-1.02)

Cord blood
plasma total
25(OH)D
concentrations
(<11 ng/ml =
deficiency)

Vitamin D deficient versus
not deficient (reference)

Comments
Adjusted for season
of birth, pets in
the home, infant
sex, maternal age,
maternal education,
and ethnicity.

Any food sensitization:
1.16 (0.83-1.63)
Egg sensitization: 0.84
(0.56-1.27)
Milk sensitization: 1.15
(0.76-1.73)
Peanut sensitization: 1.06
(0.64-1.75)

Allergic
sensitization
(sIgE to milk/
egg/
peanut for
years 1 to 3
and egg/peanut
for years 5+)

Plasma folate
levels

High versus low folate
levels at or before age 6
years):
8% versus 26% (P=0.02)

Unadjusted analysis
only.

continued

502

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-5 Continued

Author, Year
Dunstan et al.,
2012

Magdelijns et
al., 2011

Population

N

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Prospective
cohort,
Australia

Pregnant
women (healthy
nonsmokers with
uncomplicated
term pregnancies)

628 women

12 months

Prospective
birth
cohort, the
Netherlands

Children in the
KOALA birth
cohort

2,834

Study Design,
Country

484 infants

2 years

503

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition
IgE-mediated
food allergy
was defined
as a history
of immediate
symptoms
following
contact and/or
ingestion and a
positive SPT to
the implicated
food

Exposure
Tertiles of
maternal folate
intake from
supplements
(FFQ during 3rd
trimester)

Folate intake:

(1) <200 mg/day
(2) 200-499 mg/
day
(3) >500 mg/day

Sensitized to food allergens
(1) reference group
(2) 1.3 (0.7-2.3)
(3) 1.1 (0.6-2.0)

Allergic
sensitization
(milk, peanut,
whole egg) was
assessed by
SPT at 1 year
of age

IgE-mediated food allergy
(1) reference group
(2) 1.4 (0.7-3.0)
(3) 1.1 (0.5-2.4)

Cord blood folate:
IgE-mediated food allergy
(1) 1.7 (0.5-5.6)
(2) reference group
(3) 2.6 (0.9-8.1)
Tertiles of cord
blood folate at
delivery
(1) <50.3 nmol/l
(2) 50.3-75.1
nmol/l
(3) >75.1 nmol/l

sIgE (hen egg,
cow
milk,
peanut, and
aeroallergens)

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

Folic acid
supplement use
during pregnancy
(measured as
quintiles of
intracellular folate
status during 3rd
trimester)

Sensitized to food allergens
(1) 2.2 (0.9-5.6)
(2) reference group
(3) 1.1 (0.5-2.4)

Comments
Also looked at
maternal intake
of folate from
food, but found no
differences in the
maternal dietary
folate intakes of
infants with any
allergic outcomes.
Because of the
focus on allergy in
the primary study,
sensitized allergic
mothers were
over represented
(70.6%).
All ORs adjusted
for maternal allergy
and infant postnatal
diet.

All ORs adjusted for
maternal allergy and infant
postnatal diet
Folic acid supplement use
versus no use (reference)
Increased sIgE: 1.06
(0.67-1.68)

Allergic sensitization
was to both food
allergens and
aeroallergens.

continued

504

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-5 Continued

Author, Year

Study Design,
Country

Population

N

Pregnancy cohort
with a family
history of allergic
rhinitis, asthma,
eczema, food or
other allergy

300 mother–
infant pairs

Age When
Outcome Was
Ascertained

Other Nutrient Intakes
West et al.,
2012

Prospective
cohort,
Australia

12 months

NOTE: CI = confidence interval; FFQ = food frequency questionnaire; IgE = immunoglobulin
E; OFC = oral food challenge; OR = odds ratio; RCT = randomized controlled trial; RR =
relative risk; sIgE = food-specific serum IgE; SPT = skin prick test; tIgE = total IgE; UK =
United Kingdom; US = United States; UV = ultraviolet.
a Bold indicates statistical significance at P<0.05. Results were reported as odds ratio (95%
confidence interval) unless otherwise noted. Adjusted results were extracted in the summary
table unless otherwise noted.

505

APPENDIX C

Food Allergy
or Sensitization
Outcome
Definition

IgE-mediated
food allergy
was defined
as a history
of immediate
symptoms
after contact
with and/or
ingestion and
a positive SPT
at 12 months
(milk, egg,
peanut)

Exposure

Quartiles of daily
maternal dietary
and total intakes
during pregnancy
(1) b-carotene
(2) vitamin C
(3) vitamin E
(4) copper
(5) zinc
Quartiles
Q1 lowest
(reference)
Q2
Q3
Q4 highest
Measured by
semiquantitative
FFQ administered
after 28 weels
gestation

Odds Ratioa
(95% CI) of
Food Allergy

(1) b-carotene
0.40 (0.12-1.32)
1.16 (0.43-3.11)
0.38 (0.11-1.27)
Ptrend=0.2
(2) Vitamin C
0.22 (0.06-0.78)
0.75 (0.27-2.06)
0.46 (0.16-1.36)
Ptrend=0.1
(3) Vitamin E
0.96 (0.32-2.84)
0.86 (0.29-2.54)
0.57 (0.19-1.72)
Ptrend=0.8
(4) copper
0.60 (0.22-1.60)
0.40 (0.13-1.22)
0.38 (0.11-0.95)
Ptrend=0.2
(5) zinc
0.67 (0.22-2.03)
1.28 (0.46-3.53)
0.52 (0.16-1.73)
Ptrend=0.4

Comments

Adjusted for
maternal education,
paternal history
of allergic disease,
birth weight, and
exposure to furred
pets at home; all
were included in
the multiple logistic
regression model.

506

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Systematic Review Summaries
Author, year

Best et al., 2016

Aims/Key questions

To develop a clearer understanding of the effect to the
developing fetus, before commencement of the progression of
atopy (“atopic march”) and establishment of allergic disease
symptoms.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Study design: prospective studies, including longitudinal
observational studies and RCTs and quasi-randomized trial.
• Exposure: maternal fish or n-3 LCPUFA intake during
pregnancy.
• Intervention and comparator: intervention modifying
maternal n-3 LCPUFA intake during pregnancy with a
parallel control group or placebo.
• Outcome measures: Incidence of atopic disease (i.e., IgE­
mediated allergic disease) or sensitization in the offspring
during infancy, childhood, or adolescence. The presence
of IgE-mediated allergic disease is defined as a clinician
diagnosis, parent report of symptoms of allergic disease,
or parent report of a physician’s diagnosis. Sensitization
is defined as a positive SPT or IgE serology indicating
sensitization.
Exclusion criteria:
• Animal studies, cross-sectional studies, and retrospective
and case-control studies.
• Studies of maternal n-3 LCPUFA consumption or
supplementation in the postnatal period only (breastfeeding
or direct supplementation of the infant).
• Studies that reported immune biomarkers by laboratory
assessment in the absence of evaluation of symptoms or
clinical diagnosis of allergic disease in the offspring.

Literature search dates or Inception to July 30, 2015
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

3 RCTs (based on SPT)

Synthesis methods

Summary tables and meta-analysis

507

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Key findings

Three RCTs with sensitization outcomes at age 12 months were
combined in meta-analysis. Definitions of sensitization were
inconsistent. Overall risk of bias of the three RCTs was low to
moderate. One RCT was rated high risk of bias for incomplete
outcome data reporting and one was rated high risk of bias for
selective reporting.
• Fixed effect meta-analysis showed a significant reduction
in “sensitization to egg” at 0-12 months (pooled RR: 0.55;
95% CI: 0.39-0.76; P=0.0004)
• Fixed effect meta-analysis showed a significant reduction in
“sensitization to any food” at 12 months (pooled RR: 0.59;
95% CI: 0.46-0.76; P<0.0001)

Limitations

• This systematic review did not focus on food allergy.
• Fixed effect meta-analysis ignores clinical heterogeneity
(e.g., different doses of n-3 fatty acids) and produced more
significant results.
Note: Discordant results with Klemens et al. (2011) meta­
analysis. Overlaps in two RCTs. Best et al. (2016) did not
include one study that was included in Klemens et al. (2011).
Klemens et al. (2011) performed random-effects meta-analysis
while Best et al. (2016) performed fixed-effects meta-analysis.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?

Conflict of interest (COI) stated?

Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y (the authors noted
that the risk of
publication bias cannot
be excluded because
only published studies
were included in
meta-analysis)
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

continued

508

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Author, year

Boyle et al., 2016

Aims/Key questions

To determine whether feeding infants with hydrolyzed formula
reduces their risk of allergic or autoimmune disease.
Interventions and comparators:
• Inclusions: Any hydrolyzed formula of cow milk origin
compared with any nonhydrolyzed cow milk formula,
human milk, or another type of hydrolyzed cow milk
formula. Also included were studies in which hydrolyzed
formula was given as part of a multifaceted intervention,
which the authors defined as an intervention with at least
two other components in addition to the hydrolyzed
formula—for example, exclusion of allergenic food from
the mother’s diet, promotion of breastfeeding, delayed
introduction of solid food, or measures to avoid exposure
to house dust mite. Studies in which other interventions
were applied to both intervention and control groups, such
as exclusion of cows’ milk from the mother’s diet during
lactation also were included.
• Exclusions: Studies of hydrolyzed formula of milk other
than cow milk, such as hydrolyzed rice, goat milk, or soy
formula.
Study designs of interest: All intervention trials.
Populations of interest:
• Inclusions: Studies of infant feeding between birth and age
12 months.
• Exclusions: Studies in which infants or their mothers were
defined by the presence of a pre-existing disease state,
including very low birth weight or premature infants.
Outcomes of interest:
• Atopic outcomes included were asthma (categorized
as wheeze, recurrent wheeze, atopic wheeze, bronchial
hyper-reactivity, forced vital capacity, peak expiratory
flow rate, forced expiratory volume in 1 second), eczema,
allergic rhinitis and/or conjunctivitis, food allergy, allergic
sensitization (that is, SPT or sIgE assessment, or tIgE level).
• Autoimmune outcomes included were type 1 diabetes
mellitus (defined serologically and/or clinically),
celiac disease (defined serologically and/or clinically),
inflammatory bowel disease, autoimmune thyroid disease,
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, vitiligo, or psoriasis.

Study eligibility criteria

Literature search dates or The Cochrane Library (2013, issue 7), EMBASE (1947 to July
year range
2013), LILACS (1982 to July 2013), Medline (1946 to July
2013), and Web of Science (1970 to July 2013). Searches run on
July 25, 2013, and rerun on April 17, 2015.

509

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Number of food allergy
studies included

13

Synthesis methods

Narrative text and meta-analysis

Key findings

There was no significant difference in risk of “any food allergy”
with partially (pooled RR: 1.73; 95% CI: 0.79-; I2=42%) or
extensively (pooled RR 0.86; 95% CI: 0.26-2.82; I2=42%)
hydrolyzed formula compared with standard formula at age 0-4
years, nor for extensively hydrolyzed formula at age 5-14 years.
[Note that number of studies included in each meta-analysis was
not reported in text.]
No difference was found in food allergy to cow milk, egg, or
(partially hydrolyzed formula only) peanut. Direct comparison of
the two formulas (egg allergy) and casein versus whey dominant
extensively hydrolyzed formula showed no significant difference
in risk of food allergy. [Note: no other details reported in text.]
There was no significant difference in risk of allergic
sensitization to cow milk with partially (pooled RR: 1.30; 95%
CI: 0.65-2.60; I2=0%; seven studies) or extensively (pooled RR:
0.77; 95% CI: 0.09-6.73; I2=77%; three studies) hydrolyzed
formula, and no significant difference between groups for risk of
allergic sensitization to “any allergen” or raised total IgE level.
The strength of evidence was graded as moderate for partially
hydrolyzed formula, and as very low for exclusively hydrolyzed
formula.
Many studies of allergic outcomes included in this review had
unclear or high risk of bias and evidence of conflict of interest,
often because of inadequate methods of randomization and
treatment allocation (selection bias) and support of the study
or investigators from manufacturers of hydrolyzed formula.
In many cases study participants were infants with early
full formula feeding, so findings might not be applicable to
populations with more typical feeding patterns.

Limitations

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?

Characteristics of included provided?

Y
Y
Y – Appendix 1
Y
Partially – List of
excluded studies was
not reported
Y – Characteristics of
included studies are
summarized in tables A
and B in appendix 3.
continued

510

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y – GRADE approach
Y
Y
Y

Author, year

Cuello-Carcia et al., 2016

Aims/Key questions

To provide evidence-based recommendations about the use of
prebiotic supplements for the primary prevention of allergies.

Study eligibility criteria

According to the evidence profiles table, the study eligibility
criteria can be assumed to be:
• Population: healthy infants
• Intervention: prebiotic supplementation
• Comparison: no prebiotic supplementation
• Main outcomes: development of allergy, nutritional status,
adverse effects
• Setting: outpatient

Literature search dates or Up to January 2015, with an update on July 29, 2015
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

1

Synthesis methods

GRADE approach

Key findings

Outcome

Without
prebiotics
(per
1,000)

With
prebiotics
(per
1,000)

Difference Relative
(95% CI) effect
(per 1,000) (95% CI)

Certainty
of the
evidence
(GRADE)

Food
allergy

170

48 (14 to
170)

122 fewer RR 0.28
(0 to 156 (0.08 to
fewer)
1.00)

VERY
LOW

511

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Conclusions and research The guideline panel determined that there is a low certainty of
needs
a net benefit from using prebiotics in infants. Based on the body
of available evidence, it is likely that prebiotic supplementation
in infants reduces the risk of developing recurrent wheezing and
possibly also the development of food allergy. There is very low
certainty prebiotics have an effect on other outcomes. However,
because of low certainty of evidence or no published information
about other outcomes, the fact that the authors did not find
evidence of an effect on these outcomes does not imply that such
an effect does not exist.
Limitations

This publication is a guideline paper. Although the guideline
appears to be based on a systematic review, the methods of
systematic review were not fully reported in this publication. No
other source or citation to the systematic review was found.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?

Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Yes
Not reported
Yes
Not reported
Partially – Excluded
studies were not
reported
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

continued

512

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Author, year

Newberry et al., 2016

Aims/Key questions

To update a prior systematic review on the effects of omega-3
fatty acids (n-3 fatty acids) on maternal and child health and to
assess the evidence for their effects on, and associations with,
additional outcomes.
Key Question 2: Fetal/childhood exposures
– What is the influence of maternal intakes of n-3 fatty acids
or the n-3 fatty acid content of maternal breast milk (with or
without knowledge of maternal intake of n-3 fatty acids) or
n-3 fatty acid-supplemented infant formula or intakes of n-3
fatty acids from sources other than maternal breast milk or
supplemented infant formula on the following outcomes in term
or preterm human infants?
• Growth patterns
• Neurological development
• Visual function
• Cognitive development
• Autism
• Learning disorders
• ADHD
• Atopic dermatitis
• Allergies (Note: including food allergies)
• Respiratory illness

Study eligibility criteria

Populations of interest:
• Healthy preterm or term infants of healthy women/mothers
whose n-3 fatty acid exposures were monitored during
pregnancy.
• Breastfed infants of healthy mothers whose n-3 fatty acid
exposure was monitored and/or who participated in an n-3
fatty acid intervention during breastfeeding beginning at
birth.
• Healthy preterm or term infants with and without family
history of respiratory conditions (for outcomes related
to atopic dermatitis, allergy, respiratory conditions) of
mothers whose n-3 exposures were monitored during
pregnancy and/or breastfeeding.
• Healthy children or children with a family history of a
respiratory disorder, a cognitive or visual development
disorder, autism spectrum disorder, ADHD, or learning
disabilities, age 0 to 18 years who participated in an n-3
fatty acid-supplemented infant formula intervention or an
n-3 supplementation trial during infancy.

513

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Interventions of interest:
• N-3 fatty acid supplements (e.g., EPA, DHA, ALA, singly
or in combination);
• N-3 fatty acid supplemented foods (e.g., eggs) with
quantified n-3 fatty acid content
• High-dose pharmaceutical grade n-3 fatty acids, e.g.,
Omacor®, Ropufa®, MaxEPA®, Efamed, Res-Q®, Epagis,
Almarin, Coromega, Lovaza®, Vascepa® (icosapent ethyl)
o Exclude doses of more than 6g/d, except for trials that
report adverse events
• N-3 fatty acid fortified infant formulae
o E.g., Enfamil® Lipil®; Gerber® Good Start DHA &
ARA®; Similac® Advance®
o N-3 fatty acid fortified follow-up formula
o Exclude parenterally administered sources
• Marine oils, including fish oil, cod liver oil, menhaden oil,
and algal with quantified n-3 fatty acid content
• Algal or other marine sources (e.g., phytoplankton) of
omega-3 fatty acids with quantified n-3 content
Exposures of interest:
• Dietary n-3 fatty acids from foods if concentrations are
quantified in food frequency questionnaires
• Breast milk n-3 fatty acids (KQ2)
• Biomarkers (EPA, DHA, ALA, DPA, SDA), including but
not limited to the following:
o Plasma fatty acids
o Erythrocyte fatty acids
o Adipocyte fatty acids
Comparators of interest:
• Inactive comparators:
o Placebo
o Nonfortified infant formula
• Active comparators:
o Different n-3 sources
o Different n-3 concentrations
o Alternative n-3 fortified infant formula
o Soy-based infant formula
o Diet with different level of Vitamin E exposure
Outcomes of interest:
• Risk for allergies. Validated allergy assessment procedures,
preferably challenge (SPT or validated blood tests accepted)
Timing of interest:
• Interventions implemented within 1 month of birth or
exposures measured within 1 month of birth
• Follow-up duration is 0 to 18 years
Literature search dates or Update searches were from the year 2000. For the newly added
year range
topics (e.g., allergies), the authors “reference mined” articles that
they identified to determine whether any studies conducted and
published before 2000 should be obtained and included.
continued

514

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Number of food allergy
studies included

3 RCTs

Synthesis methods

Narrative text and meta-analysis

Key findings

All three RCTs recruited pregnant women whose infants were at
high risk of atopy (e.g., parent diagnosis of allergy, or sibling has
diagnosed or suspected allergy).
• Among the three prenatal n-3 interventions and two
follow-up studies, three found associations between
maternal n-3 fatty acid supplementation (DHA + EPA,
varying doses ranging from 0.8 to 3.09 g/d) and lower risk
of allergies (denoted by sensitization to egg allergen and
positive skin prick test). However, in all but one study,
these relationships were no longer observed or became
marginal after adjusting for potential confounders or after
long-term follow-up.
• Meta-analysis of three RCTs (N=949) with 12-month
food allergy outcomes yielded an insignificant summary
effect size for DHA+EPA supplementation and risk of food
allergy (OR: 0.54; 95% CI 0.05-6.2; I2=42.3%).
• Note that the strength of evidence was graded as low
for the conclusion of no significant effect of DHA or
DHA+EPA supplementation during pregnancy on food
allergies.
• The risk for allergies is an additional outcome of interest
that was not included in the original review.
• The search strategy was not designed specifically for food
allergies outcomes.

Limitations

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?

Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?

Y
Y
Y/N (The search
strategy was not
designed to specifically
for food allergies
outcomes because
“food allergies” were
not one of the prespecified outcomes of
interest)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

515

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
N (only published
studies were included)
Y

Author, year

Cuello-Carcia et al., 2015

Aims/Key questions

To synthesize the evidence supporting use of probiotics to
prevent allergies and inform World Allergy Organization
guidelines on probiotic use. Three key questions of this
systematic review are:
1. Should supplementation of probiotics versus no such
supplementation be used in pregnant women to prevent
development of allergy in their children?
2. Should supplementation of probiotics versus no such
supplementation be used in breastfeeding mothers to prevent
development of allergy in their children?
3. Should supplementation of probiotics versus no such
supplementation be used in infants to prevent development of
allergy?

Study eligibility criteria

• Types of studies: RCTs with a minimum follow-up of 4
weeks that compared any type of probiotic with placebo,
irrespective of their language or publication status.
• Types of participants: Pregnant women, breastfeeding
mothers, and infants and children (up to age 9 years).
• Types of interventions: Any probiotic supplementation,
irrespective of formulation (capsules, oil droplets,
suspension, and supplements in infant formulas or cereals),
microorganism, supplement composition (single versus
multiple strains), or dose.
• Types of outcome measures: The World Allergy
Organization guideline panel members in a formal process
determined the outcomes of interest. The following
outcomes were deemed critical to the decision whether to
use probiotics to prevent allergies: eczema, asthma and/or
wheezing, food allergy, allergic rhinitis, any adverse effects,
and severe adverse effects.

Literature search dates or From inception to December 2014
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

6 RCTs [Note: some RCTs contributed data for more than one
meta-analysis.]

Synthesis methods

Narrative text, meta-analysis, and GRADE

continued

516

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Key findings

• No RCTs for the comparison of probiotics versus no
probiotics in pregnant women for prevention of allergy in
their children (direct evidence).
• No RCTs for the comparison of probiotics versus no
probiotics in breastfeeding women for prevention of allergy
in their children (direct evidence)
Anticipated absolute effects

Outcomes

No. of
participants
(studies)

Strength of
evidence
(GRADE)

Relative
effect, RR
(95% CI)

Risk
with no
probiotics

Risk
difference
with
probiotics

Probiotics versus no probiotics in pregnant women for prevention of allergy in their
children (indirect evidence)
Food allergy,
follow-up: range,
12-24 months

355 (3
RCTs)

●○○○
Very low

1.08
(0.73-1.59)

Study population

Note: 1.49
(0.58,
3.81) in
the forest
plot

39 per
1,000

3 more per
1,000 (11
fewer to 23
more)

Probiotics compared with no probiotics in breastfeeding women to prevent allergies in their
children (indirect)
Food allergy,
follow-up: range,
12-24 months

167 (2
RCTs)

●○○○
Very low

1.7
(0.58-4.96)

Study
population
59 per
1,000

41 more per
1,000 (25
fewer to 233
more)

Probiotics compared with no probiotics in infants to prevent allergies (direct)
Food allergy,
follow-up: range,
6-24 months

349 (3
RCTs)

●○○○
Very low

0.88
(0.55-1.43)

Study
population
167 per
1,000

20 fewer per
1,000 (75
fewer to 72
more)

517

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Anticipated absolute effects

Outcomes

No. of
participants
(studies)

Strength of
evidence
(GRADE)

Relative
effect, RR
(95% CI)

Risk
with no
probiotics

Risk
difference
with
probiotics

Probiotics compared with no probiotics in infants to prevent allergies (indirect)
Food allergy,
follow-up: range,
6-24 months

295 (2
RCTs)

●○○○
Very low

1
(0.25-3.91)

Study
population
27 per
1,000

Limitations

0 fewer per
1,000 (20
fewer to 79
more)

• There were moderate-to-serious concerns about the risk of
bias in most studies.
• Some inconsistency in reporting of the meta-analysis
results.
• Confidence that one would observe effects in real life is low
to very low (low to very low certainty in the evidence). This
is a result of the relative paucity of direct evidence in any
of the three groups in whom probiotics could be used, the
high likelihood of bias in primary studies, and the serious
imprecision of the estimated pooled effects.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y – Table E3 and
online repository
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

continued

518

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Author, year

Gunaratne et al., 2015

Aims/Key questions

To assess the effect of n-3 LCPUFA supplementation in
pregnant and/or breastfeeding women on allergy outcomes
(food allergy, atopic dermatitis [eczema], allergic rhinitis [hay
fever] and asthma/wheeze) in their children.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: RCTs focusing on n-3 LCPUFA
supplementation of pregnant and/or breasfeeding
women (compared with placebo or no treatment) and
assessed allergy outcomes of the infants or children.
Quasi-RCTs and RCTs using a cluster-randomized
design were eligible for inclusion but none were
identified.
• Types of participants: Women and their children, with
either a normal or high risk of developing allergic
disease, were included. A fetus or a child with a first
degree relative with medically diagnosed allergies, or a
positive SPT, or a positive RAST was defined as being
at high risk of allergies. Infants were also considered at
high risk of allergies if their cord blood IgE level was
above 0.70 IU/mL.
• Types of interventions: All randomized comparisons
of n-3 LCPUFA supplementation given to pregnant or
lactating women (either with or without arachidonic
acid), with placebo or no supplementation as a
control, regardless of dose regimens and duration of
intervention. Trials in which fish was the intervention
were included if appropriately controlled, for example,
if the diet was appropriately adjusted to match the
protein contribution of fish.
• Primary outcomes:
o Medically diagnosed any allergy with sensitization,
i.e., IgE-mediated allergies where both the signs and
symptoms of the allergic disease and a positive SPT
and/or RAST test are present.
o Medical diagnosis or parental report (using
validated questionnaire) of any allergy, +/– IgE
sensitization.
• Secondary outcomes: Children with specific forms
of allergy, including food allergy, atopic dermatitis
(eczema), asthma/wheeze, allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
with IgE sensitization and +/– IgE sensitization, SPT
results, and parent-reported allergies using nonvalidated questionnaires.
Exclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: Trials published in abstract form only,
trials using a crossover design, and trials examining
biochemical outcomes only.

519

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Literature search dates
or year range

Inception to August 2014

Number of food allergy Five
studies included
Synthesis methods

Narrative text and meta-analysis

Key findings

Three of the five trials had high risk of bias for incomplete
outcome data (attrition bias) and/or selective reporting bias.
• N-3 LCPUFA supplementation reduced the incidence of
IgE-mediated food allergies in children up to 12 months
of age (117 infants, RR: 0.13; 95% CI: 0.02-0.95),
but there were no clear differences found between the
intervention and control groups at any other age (12 to
36 months, 825 children, average RR: 0.58; 95% CI:
0.18-1.88; >36 months, 706 children, RR: 1.43; 95%
CI: 0.63-3.26).
• When food allergies +/– IgE sensitivity were considered,
results showed few differences from those for IgE­
mediated allergies with no differences in the direction of
findings from those for IgE-mediated allergies:
o Up to 12 months of age, 117 infants, RR: 0.13;
95% CI: 0.02-0.95.
o Between 12 and 36 months, random-effects meta­
analysis of four trials (973 children) showed pooled
RR: 0.72; 95% CI: 0.40-1.30.
o >36 months of age, 706 children, RR: 1.43; 95%
CI: 0.63-3.26.
• Review authors MM and CTC were investigators on
two trials included in the review.
• Studies included in this review used differing doses,
DHA to EPA ratios, and duration of n-3 LCPUFA
supplementation, and did not take into account the
baseline n-3 LCPUFA status of the women.

Limitations

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
continued

520

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Author, year

de Silva et al., 2014

Aims/Key questions

This systematic review is one of the series of systematic
reviews for developing EAACI Guidelines for Food Allergy and
Anaphylaxis.
This systematic review examined ways to prevent the
development of food allergy in children and adults.

Study eligibility criteria

• This review focused solely on studies that were primarily
concerned with preventing sensitization to food(s) and/or
the development of food allergy. Studies seeking to prevent
potential manifestations of food allergy, such as atopic
dermatitis (eczema) or asthma, but not including an explicit
diagnosis of sensitization to food or food allergy, were not
included.
• Systematic reviews and meta-analyses, RCTs, quasi-RCTs,
controlled clinical trials, controlled before-and-after studies,
interrupted time series studies, and prospective cohort
studies were eligible.
• No language restrictions were applied and, where possible,
relevant studies in languages other than English were
translated.

Literature search dates or The following databases were searched: Cochrane Library,
year range
MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, ISI Web of Science, TRIP
Database, and Clinicaltrials.gov from inception to September 30,
2012
Number of food allergy
studies included

74

Synthesis methods

Narrative synthesis and summary tables

521

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Key findings

Table 1 summarized key evidence about prevention strategies:
• Overall, the evidence is not strong enough to recommend
changing the diet or supplements of pregnant or
breastfeeding women at normal or high risk. Although
breastfeeding may have many other benefits, the evidence
in relation to the prevention of food allergy is not strong.
This, to a large extent, reflects the ethical challenges of
randomizing infants to a nonbreastfeeding arm.
• There is more evidence about the benefits of alternatives
to cow milk formula for babies at high risk. Extensively
hydrolyzed whey or casein formula and partially
hydrolyzed formula may have a protective effect, but it
appears that soy formula does not protect against food
allergies.
• Probiotics do not seem to be protective in infants at high
or normal risk, and neither does delaying the introduction
of solid foods until later than the recommended minimum
weaning age. Combining dietary with environmental
modifications during infancy may be the best way forward
for infants at high risk.

Limitations

• The studies included were heterogeneous, and as a result,
it was not appropriate to quantitatively synthesize this
evidence.
• There are also limitations with the studies themselves. To
date, the focus of research has largely been on preventing
IgE-mediated food allergy rather than on non-IgE-mediated
food allergy. Many studies are small, short term, and focus
on the surrogate measure of food sensitization rather than
food allergy. Sensitization may be a normal, harmless,
and transitory phenomenon, which does not necessarily
correlate with allergic disease.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y (protocol published
elsewhere)
Y (protocol published
elsewhere)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
continued

522

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Author, year

Kong et al., 2014

Aims/Key questions

To investigate the preventive effect of probiotics on pediatric
food allergy.

Study eligibility criteria

• Study design of interest: RCTs with any sample size.
• Population of interest: Infants and their mothers whose
first-degree relatives have a history of allergic disease
(asthma, allergic nose inflammation, allergic conjunctivitis,
allergic eczema, food allergies, etc.).
• Interventions of interest: Probiotics may be of single or
multiple mixed bacteria type with any treatment course and
dose.
• Outcome of interest: Incidence of food allergy diseases.

Literature search dates or Last search conducted September 30, 2013
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

10

Synthesis methods

Meta-analysis

Key findings

• Total 1,349 subjects in the probiotics groups and 1,352
subjects in the control groups. Individual study sample size
ranged from 60 to 888.
• Fixed-effects meta-analysis of 10 RCTs showed no
significant difference in the incidence of food allergies
(pooled RR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.76-1.03) with moderate
heterogeneity (I2=33%) comparing prenatal and postnatal
probiotics supplementation with placebo or control.

Limitations

• Major sources of heterogeneity include: follow-up durations
(ranging from 1 to 7 years); flora types of probiotic
bacteria; dose and concentration of probiotics.
• Individual study characteristics were not reported, overall
risk of bias (or quality) for the included 10 RCTs was
moderate, and some methodological concerns regarding the
systematic review (see AMSTAR rating below).
• Food allergy outcome definitions were not reported.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?

Y
Y
N – Only one database
used
N

523

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

N – Excluded studies
not provided
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N – COI not provided
for either the review of
the included studies

Author, year

Marrs et al., 2013

Aims/Key Questions

To systematically review the evidence on the associations
between microbial exposure and food allergies.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Food allergy outcomes included food challenge data,
physician-diagnosed food allergy, reported doctor diagnosis
of food allergy or food sensitization diagnosed by either
SPT or elevated sIgE levels.
• Using a study design appropriate to assess impact of
microbial exposure. [Note: not explicitly defined.]
Exclusion criteria:
• Management guidance documents, reviews and studies
investigating celiac disease, food intolerance and animal
models were excluded.

Literature search dates or Medline from inception to July 2012
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included
Synthesis methods

46

• Summary tables.
• Qualitative synthesis using a pragmatic score (quality
grading/rating scores) developed for this study. Publications
were awarded greater weight of evidence if they used food
challenge data rather than reported doctor diagnosis or
only sensitization data (challenge-proven food allergy +2;
[reported] physician-diagnosis +1, SPT or IgE measurement
sensitization +0).

continued

524

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Key findings

• Mode of delivery: All 13 studies reported that being born
by caesarean was associated with an increased risk of
developing food allergy or food sensitization, except the
study of lowest quality. Six of these associations were
significant. However, only two pertained to clinical food
allergy diagnoses. The overall quality of these 13 studies
was moderate (2 studies received a quality score of 4, 4
received a score of 3, 5 received a score of 2, and 2 received
a score of 1).
• Farming lifestyle and animal exposure: Of four studies
investigating farm and animal exposure on food allergy, the
Healthnuts Study found significantly less challenge-proven
egg, sesame and peanut allergy among infants living with
a dog during the first year of life (aOR: 0.6 [0.5-0.8]).
However the quality of this study was poor (score of 2).
• Endotoxin exposure: Two studies were included but the
quality was very poor (score of 0 and 1).
• Childhood infections: No studies investigated the
association between viral and bacterial infections and
challenge-proven food allergy.
• Childhood vaccinations: No association was found for any
of the recommended childhood vaccinations.
• Antibiotic use: Some evidence suggests that antibiotic
exposure increases the risk of eczema, but no such
relationship has been found for food allergy.
• Gut microbiota: Five studies investigated gut microbiota
characteristics, two of which compared data with respect
to food challenge outcomes and the other three used food
sensitization parameters. The two studies ranking highest in
quality originated from the same Spanish infants who were
diagnosed with IgE-mediated cow milk allergy by milk
challenge at a tertiary referral center. [Note that studies
were not summarized in the summary tables. Summary of
individual study findings was provided in text.]
• Pro- and prebiotics: Eleven probiotic RCTs (quality score
ranged from 0 to 3) have assessed whether microbial
supplementation may be used in the prevention or
treatment of food allergy or sensitization, but results have
been disappointing overall.

525

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Limitations

• Some methodological concerns regarding the search and
study selection process. The authors seem to “up-play”
some positive results, not taking into account the quality
scores in their synthesis. Most of the studies were rated
poor quality.
• With exception of probiotics, all studies for other microbial
exposures were observational studies.
• The studies selected were highly heterogeneous in design
and quality.
• Most studies were primarily designed to investigate
respiratory allergies or eczema, and hence lacked objective
characterization of clinical food allergy and statistical
power to detect significant risk estimates.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Not reported
N (Medline only)
Y
No but available on
request
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y/N – COI of the
systematic review
authors were reported
but COI not provided
for the included studies

Author, year

Kramer and Kakuma, 2012

Aims/Key questions

To assess the effects of prescribing an antigen avoidance diet
during pregnancy or lactation, or both, on maternal and infant
nutrition and on the prevention or treatment of atopic disease in
the child; positive SPTs to dietary antigens; and cord blood levels
of IgE (a predictor of subsequent atopic disease).

continued

526

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Study design: All acceptably controlled (randomized or
quasi-randomized) comparisons of maternal dietary antigen
avoidance prescribed to pregnant (at any time during
pregnancy) or lactating women at high risk, regardless
of degree (number of foods eliminated from the diet) or
duration.
• Population: Pregnant or lactating women at high risk of
giving birth to an atopic child, based on a history of atopic
disease (eczema, asthma, or hay fever) in the mother, father,
or a previous child. Lactating mothers of infants with
established atopic eczema.
• Intervention: Prescription of diet with exclusion (or reduced
quantity) of potentially antigenic foods such as cow milk,
egg, peanut, fish, and chocolate.
• Outcome measures:
o Primary outcomes: Occurrence and severity of atopic
disease in the child.
o Secondary outcomes: Nutritional status of mother
(gestational weight gain) and fetus (birth weight); other
pregnancy outcomes (e.g., preterm birth); positive SPT
to ingested antigen (especially egg and milk); and cord
blood IgE levels.
Exclusion criteria:
• Trials of multimodal interventions that include, in addition
to maternal dietary antigen avoidance, manipulation of
the infant’s diet other than breast milk or of other nondietary aspects of the infant’s environment (i.e., exposure to
inhaled allergens).

Literature search dates or Unspecified; search conducted on July 6, 2012
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

Three (based on SPT results)

Synthesis methods

Summary tables and meta-analysis

527

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Key findings

• Antigen avoidance during pregnancy: Results from two
trials involving 334 pregnant women at high risk of atopic
offspring suggest a lower incidence of positive SPT to egg
antigen at 6 months of age, but the effect was no longer
evident at 18 months, nor was any benefit apparent at
either age for SPT to milk antigen (random-effects meta­
analysis pooled RR: 0.95; 95% CI: 0.52-1.74). The risk of
bias of the two trials is mixed (one was low risk and one
was high risk of bias).
• Antigen avoidance during lactation: A larger included trial
(N=497) did not report on atopic eczema or other allergic
disease outcomes, but found no evidence of sensitization
to milk, egg, or peanut antigen on SPT at 1, 2, or 7 years
of age. The risk of bias of this trial was unclear because
the information available is based solely on a published
abstract.

Limitations

• This Cochrane systematic review did not focus on food
allergies or sensitization. Out of 12 trials, only 3 reported
SPT results.
• Food sensitization outcomes were based on SPT results
only.
• Included trials had small sample sizes.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y/N (funding sources
of included studies
were not reported but
the systematic review
authors reported no
conflict of interest)

Author, year

Fisher et al., 2011

Aims/Key questions

To determine whether specific oral tolerance induction is more
effective than avoidance in inducing tolerance in children ages 0
to 18 years who have IgE-mediated food allergy.
continued

528

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Population: Children ages 0 to 18 years with IgE-mediated
food allergy proven by DBPCOFC at the start of the study.
• Outcome measures: The success of specific oral tolerance
induction was objectively assessed using oral food challenge
or DBPCOFC for tolerance but DBPCOFC for allergy.
• Quality of trial: Scored ≥1+ using the National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence (NIHCE) criteria for quality
assessment.
• Other: English language publications.

Literature search dates or 1950 to July 2009
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

Three

Synthesis methods

Summary tables and meta-analysis

Key findings

• All three RCTs examined the effect of oral tolerance
induction to cow milk protein, with one study enrolling
children who were exquisitely sensitive, reacting at <1 ml
of whole cow milk at the start of the study. Age ranges of
children included in each RCT were wide (0.6-12.9; 5-17;
6-17 years).
• One RCT also performed oral tolerance induction to hen
egg, although each child was desensitized to only one food
(cow milk or hen egg) during the study. In two RCTs,
children who were not randomized to receive specific oral
tolerance induction practiced avoidance of the relevant
allergen. Children in the third RCT consumed a placebo,
although no details of the substance used for the placebo
were provided.
• Meta-analysis: Total of 127 children were included in
the meta-analysis. Although a reduction in allergy after
treatment is highlighted, this fails to meet statistical
significance (pooled RR: 0.61; 95% CI: 0.32-1.12;
P=0.1302). Cochran Q (8.87; P=0.0118) and I2 (77.5%;
95% CI: 0%-91%) found high heterogeneity between
studies, which further reduces the significance of findings.

Limitations

• One author reviewed the studies using the NIHCE quality
framework, but no details about quality assessment were
reported. It is unclear how many studies were excluded
based on quality score.
• Included studies performed specific oral tolerance induction
only to cow milk or hen egg, and although these are the
most common childhood food allergens trials had small
sample size.

529

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?

Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
N (only one author
conducted the search
and one author
reviewed the studies)
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)

Author, year

Klemens et al., 2011

Aims/Key questions

To determine if n-3 PUFA supplementation during pregnancy
and lactation reduces risk for childhood allergic disease.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• RCTs comparing supplementation in pregnancy and
lactation with n-3 PUFA or placebo for primary prevention
of allergic disease in neonates, infants, and children.
• Study participants were pregnant or lactating women and
their offspring.
• Studies had to report on one of the following clinical or
immunological outcomes in neonates, infants, or children:
asthma, atopy, and food allergy as a clinical diagnosis or
as response to the egg SPT at any time during the first 12
months of life. Diagnoses must be verified by medical or
nursing clinicians.

Literature search dates or 1950 to October 2010
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

Three

Synthesis methods

Summary tables, meta-analysis and narrative synthesis

continued

530

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Key findings

• Three RCTs (N=264) reported on clinical diagnoses of food
allergy in children. All RCTs were rated high quality.
• Random-effects meta-analysis showed no significant
difference in food allergy between children of mothers
who received n-3 PUFA supplementation and children of
mothers receiving placebo (6/128 versus 16/136, pooled
OR: 0.46; 95% CI: 0.156-1.38). There was no significant
between-study heterogeneity (P=0.226, I2=32.777) nor
was there evidence of publication bias (Egger’s regression
intercept P=0.998).
o When only RCTs in which supplementation was started
during pregnancy were considered, fewer children with
food allergies were born to n-3 PUFA-supplemented
mothers than to placebo-supplemented mothers, but
this difference was not significant (4/92 versus 15/108,
pooled OR: 0.34; 95% CI: 0.10-1.15).
• Two of the included studies (N=187) reported on the
period prevalence of positive response to the egg SPT in
children up to age 12 months after maternal n-3 PUFA
supplementation during pregnancy. Supplementation
significantly reduced a positive SPT response to egg (12/87
versus 32/100, pooled OR: 0.33; 95% CI: 0.16-0.70).
There was no significant between-study heterogeneity
(P=0.957, I2=0.000).

Limitations

• The different doses of supplementation in the combined
studies also may represent a weakness of this meta-analysis,
given that n-3 PUFA supplementation may have an inverted
U-shaped dose–response curve, with moderate doses
conferring more benefit than high doses in some models.
• Although a positive SPT indicates the presence of foodspecific IgE antibodies, a positive response may be seen in
tolerant individuals and does not necessarily represent food
allergy.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?
Likelihood of publication bias assessed?

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

531

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Conflict of interest stated?

Author, year
Aims/Key questions

Study eligibility criteria

Y/N (COI of the
systematic review
authors was provided
but not provided for
included studies)
Osborn and Sinn, 2006
• To determine the effect of feeding hydrolyzed formulas
on allergy and food intolerance in infants and children
compared to adapted cow milk or human breast milk.
If hydrolyzed formulas are effective, to determine what
type of hydrolyzed formula is most effective, including
extensively and partially hydrolyzed formulas.
• To determine which infants benefit, including infants at low
or high risk of allergy and infants receiving early, shortterm, or prolonged formula feeding.
Inclusion criteria:
• Types of studies: RCTs and quasi-RCTs that compare the
use of a hydrolyzed infant formula to human milk or an
adapted cow milk formula. Random and quasi-random
(e.g., using alternation) trials with ≥80% follow-up of
participants were eligible for inclusion.
• Types of participants: Infants in the first 6 months of life
without clinical evidence of allergy.
• Types of interventions: Hydrolyzed cow milk and soy
formulas, and extensively and partially hydrolyzed
formulas. Hydrolyzed formulas may be used for either
o early, short-term supplementary or sole formula feeding
in infants unable to be exclusively breastfed in the first
days of life;
o prolonged supplementation of breastfed infants or sole
formula feeding in infants in the first months of life; or
o weaning from the breast using infant formula.
• Type of controls: The control group may include infants
who receive exclusive human milk (either breast fed or
expressed) or an adapted cow milk formula.
• Primary outcomes:
o All allergy including asthma, atopic dermatitis, allergic
rhinitis or food allergy.
o Food intolerance.

Literature search dates or Inception to March 2006
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

Five
continued

532

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Synthesis methods

Meta-analysis, summary table, narrative text

Key findings

For Comparison 01 Early short-term feeding: Hydrolyzed
formula versus human milk feeding among low-risk infants:
• (90 infants) no significant difference in any allergy (RR:
1.43; 95% CI: 0.38-5.37), food allergy (RR: 1.43; 95% CI:
0.38-5.37), and cow milk allergy (RR: 7.11; 95% CI: 0.35­
143.84) at age 3 years.
• (3,559 infants) no significant difference in cow milk
allergy up to mean age of 27 months (RR: 0.87; 95% CI:
0.52-1.46).
For Comparison 03 Early short-term feeding: Hydrolyzed
formula versus cow milk formula:
• (77 infants) no significant difference in childhood allergy
incidence (RR: 1.37; 95% CI: 0.33-5.71), childhood food
allergy (RR: 1.37; 95% CI: 0.33-5.71), and childhood cow
milk allergy (RR: 5.13; 95% CI: 0.25-103.43).
• (3,478 infants) a reduction in infant cow milk allergy of
borderline significance (RR: 0.62; 95% CI: 0.38-1.00).
For Comparison 04 Prolonged feeding: Hydrolyzed formula
versus cow milk formula:
• (141 infants) no significant difference in infant food allergy
(RR: 1.82; 95% CI: 0.64-5.16).
• (67 infants) a significant reduction in infant cow milk
allergy (RR: 0.36; 95% CI: 0.15-0.89).
For Comparison 07 Prolonged feeding: Extensively hydrolyzed
formula versus cow milk formula:
• (96 infants) no significant difference in food allergy (RR:
1.15; 95% CI: 0.33-4.02).
For Comparison 08 Prolonged feeding: Partially hydrolyzed
formula versus cow milk formula:
• (91 infants) no significant difference in infant food allergy
(RR: 2.56; 95% CI: 0.86-7.56).
• a significant reduction in cow milk allergy in infancy (RR:
0.36; 95% CI: 0.15-0.89).
For Comparison 09 Prolonged feeding: Extensively hydrolyzed
formula versus partially hydrolyzed formula:
• Meta-analysis of two studies (N=341) found a significant
reduction in infant food allergy (typical RR: 0.43; 95% CI:
0.19-0.99).
• (246 infants) no significant difference in infant cow milk
allergy (RR: 0.13; 95% CI: 0.01-1.16).

533

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Key findings
(continued)

For Comparison 11 Prolonged feeding: Hydrolyzed formula
versus cow milk formula: Allergy/intolerance confirmed by test:
• (141 infants) no significant difference in infant food allergy
confirmed by specific IgE (RR: 1.82; 95% CI: 0.64-5.16).
• significant reduction in infant cow milk allergy confirmed
by specific IgE (RR: 0.36; 95% CI: 0.15-0.89).
• no significant difference in infant food intolerance
confirmed by DBPCOFC (RR: 0.48; 95% CI: 0.07-3.33).
For Comparison 14 Prolonged feeding: Partially hydrolyzed
whey formula versus cow milk formula:
• significant reduction in infant cow milk allergy (RR: 0.36;
95% CI: 0.15-0.89).
For Comparison 15 Prolonged feeding: Partially hydrolyzed
casein containing formula versus cow milk formula:
• (91 infants) no significant difference in infant food allergy
(RR: 2.56; 95% CI: 0.86-7.56).
For Comparison 17 Prolonged feeding: Extensively hydrolyzed
casein containing formula versus cow milk formula:
• (96 infants) no significant difference in infant food allergy
(RR: 1.15; 95% CI: 0.33-4.02).

Limitations

• Many “meta-analyses” of small number of studies.
• Infant and childhood allergy had different definitions,
timing of measurement and methods for measurement
from study to study. Most studies were small or had
methodological limitations, with benefits not persisting
when analysis was restricted to trials with blinding of
measurement to study formula or to studies of adequate
methodology.

AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?

Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N (many “meta­
analysis” had one
study)
N
Y
continued

534

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
Author, year

Kramer and Kakuma, 2004

Aims/Key questions

To assess the effects on child health, growth, and
development, and on maternal health, of exclusive
breastfeeding for 6 months versus exclusive breastfeeding
for 3 to 4 months with mixed breastfeeding (introduction
of complementary liquid or solid foods with continued
breastfeeding) thereafter through 6 months.

Study eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria:
• Study design: Controlled clinical trials and observational
studies, published in all languages, examining whether
or not exclusive breastfeeding until age 6 months has an
impact on growth, development, morbidity, and survival
of healthy, term infants and their mothers.
• Comparison: The comparisons must have been based
on one group of infants who received exclusive
breastfeeding for at least 3 but less than 7 months
and mixed breastfeeding until 6 months or later
(i.e., infants were introduced to liquid or solid foods
between 3 and 6 months of age), and another group
of infants who were exclusively breastfed for at least 6
months. Studies comparing infants receiving prolonged
exclusive breastfeeding (more than 6 months) to those
exclusively breastfed for 6 months and continued mixed
breastfeeding after 6 months also were included. Among
infants exclusive breastfeeding for at least 3 months,
the interventions/exposures compared were continued
exclusive breastfeeding versus mixed breastfeeding. The
“complementary” foods used in mixed breastfeeding
included juices, formula, other milks, other liquids,
or solid foods. Although the WHO defines exclusive
breastfeeding as breastfeeding with no supplemental
liquids or solid foods other than medications or
vitamins, few studies strictly adhered to the WHO’s
definition.
• Population: Lactating mothers and their healthy, term,
singleton infants.

535

APPENDIX C

TABLE C-6 Continued
Study eligibility criteria
(continued)

• Outcome measures: Any infant or maternal health
outcomes. The infant outcomes specifically sought
(but not necessarily found) included growth (weight,
length, and head circumference and z-scores (based on
the WHO/CDC reference) for weight-for-age, lengthfor-age, and weight-for-length), infections, morbidity,
mortality, micronutrient status, neuromotor and
cognitive development, asthma, atopic eczema, other
allergic diseases, type 1 diabetes, blood pressure, and
subsequent adult chronic diseases such as coronary
heart disease, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. Maternal
outcomes sought included postpartum weight loss,
duration of lactational amenorrhea, and such chronic
diseases as breast and ovarian cancer and osteoporosis.
Exclusion criteria:
• Studies of (or including) low birthweight (less than
2,500 g) infants were not excluded, provided that such
infants were born at term (at least 37 completed weeks).
Only those studies with an internal comparison group
were included in the review, i.e., the authors excluded
studies based on external comparisons (with reference
data).
• Studies comparing exclusive breastfeeding and mixed
breastfeeding from birth were excluded, as were those
that investigated the effects of age at introduction of
nonbreast milk liquid or solid foods but did not ensure
exclusive breastfeeding at least 3 months before their
introduction.

Literature search dates or Inception to June 15, 2011
year range
Number of food allergy
studies included

One cohort study

Synthesis methods

Narrative synthesis; meta-analysis (N/A for food allergy
outcome because only one study was included)
• 1 cohort study enrolled 135 healthy Finnish infants
of atopic parents reported food allergy outcome. This
study was rated unclear overall risk of bias.
• For the comparison of exclusive breastfeeding for 6-7
months versus 3-4 months, this study also reported
a reduced risk of a history of food allergy at 1 year
but double food challenges showed no significant risk
reduction (RR: 0.77; 95% CI: 0.25-2.41).

Key findings

Limitations

• This systematic review did not focus on food allergy.
Only 1 cohort study reported food allergy outcomes.
continued

536

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

TABLE C-6 Continued
AMSTAR rating
An a priori design?
Duplicate study selection and data extraction?
Comprehensive literature search?
Status of the publication as an inclusion criterion?
List of studies (included and excluded) provided?
Characteristics of included provided?
Scientific quality of the included studies assessed and reported?
Scientific quality used in formulating conclusions?
Methods used to combine the findings appropriate?

Likelihood of publication bias assessed?
Conflict of interest stated?

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N (many “meta­
analysis” only has 1
study)
N
N

NOTE: ALA = alpha-linolenic acid; CDC = Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; CI
= confidence interval; DBPCOFC = double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenge;
DHA = docosahexaenoic acid; DPA = docosapentaenoic acid; EAACI = European Academy
of Allergy & Clinical Immunology; EPA = eicosapentaenoic acid; IgE = immunoglobulin
E; IU = international units; LCPUFA, long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid; N/A = not
available; OR = odds ratio; PUFA = polyunsaturated fatty acid; RAST = radioallergosorbent;
RCT = randomized controlled trial; RR = relative risk; SDA = stearidonic acid; SPT = skin
prick test; tIgE = total IgE; WHO = World Health Organization.

537

APPENDIX C

REFERENCES
Allen, K. J., J. J. Koplin, A. L. Ponsonby, L. C. Gurrin, M. Wake, P. Vuillermin, P. Martin, M.
Matheson, A. Lowe, M. Robinson, D. Tey, N. J. Osborne, T. Dang, H. T. Tina Tan, L.
Thiele, D. Anderson, H. Czech, J. Sanjeevan, G. Zurzolo, T. Dwyer, M. L. Tang, D. Hill,
and S. C. Dharmage. 2013. Vitamin D insufficiency is associated with challenge-proven
food allergy in infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol 131(4):1109-1116, 1116.
Baek, J. H., Y. H. Shin, I. H. Chung, H. J. Kim, E. G. Yoo, J. W. Yoon, H. M. Jee, Y. E.
Chang, and M. Y. Han. 2014. The link between serum vitamin D level, sensitization to
food allergens, and the severity of atopic dermatitis in infancy. J Pediatr 165(4):849-854.
Best, K. P., M. Gold, D. Kennedy, J. Martin, and M. Makrides. 2016. Omega-3 long-chain
PUFA intake during pregnancy and allergic disease outcomes in the offspring: A system­
atic review and meta-analysis of observational studies and randomized controlled trials.
Am J Clin Nutr 103(1):128-143.
Boyle, R. J., D. Ierodiakonou, T. Khan, J. Chivinge, Z. Robinson, N. Geoghegan, K. Jarrold,
T. Afxentiou, T. Reeves, S. Cunha, M. Trivella, V. Garcia-Larsen, and J. Leonardi-Bee.
2016. Hydrolysed formula and risk of allergic or autoimmune disease: Systematic review
and meta-analysis. BMJ 352:i974.
Bunyavanich, S., S. L. Rifas-Shiman, T. A. Platts-Mills, L. Workman, J. E. Sordillo, C. A.
Camargo, Jr., M. W. Gillman, D. R. Gold, and A. A. Litonjua. 2014. Peanut, milk, and
wheat intake during pregnancy is associated with reduced allergy and asthma in children.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(5):1373-1382.
Cuello-Garcia, C. A., J. L. Brozek, A. Fiocchi, R. Pawankar, J. J. Yepes-Nunez, L. Terracciano,
S. Gandhi, A. Agarwal, Y. Zhang, and H. J. Schunemann. 2015. Probiotics for the pre­
vention of allergy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 136(4):952-961.
Cuello-Garcia, C. A., A. Fiocchi, R. Pawankar, J. J. Yepes-Nunez, G. P. Morgano, Y. Zhang,
K. Ahn, S. Al-Hammadi, A. Agarwal, S. Gandhi, K. Beyer, W. Burks, G. W. Canonica,
M. Ebisawa, R. Kamenwa, B. W. Lee, H. Li, S. Prescott, J. J. Riva, L. Rosenwasser, H.
Sampson, M. Spigler, L. Terracciano, A. Vereda, S. Waserman, H. J. Schunemann, and
J. L. Brozek. 2016. World Allergy Organization-McMaster University Guidelines for Al­
lergic Disease Prevention (GLAD-P): Prebiotics. World Allergy Organ J 9:10.
de Silva, D., M. Geromi, S. Halken, A. Host, S. S. Panesar, A. Muraro, T. Werfel, K. HoffmannSommergruber, G. Roberts, V. Cardona, A. E. Dubois, L. K. Poulsen, R. Van Ree, B.
Vlieg-Boerstra, I. Agache, K. Grimshaw, L. O’Mahony, C. Venter, S. H. Arshad, and
A. Sheikh. 2014. Primary prevention of food allergy in children and adults: Systematic
review. Allergy 69(5):581-589.
Depner, M., M. J. Ege, J. Genuneit, J. Pekkanen, M. Roponen, M. R. Hirvonen, J. C. Dalphin,
V. Kaulek, S. Krauss-Etschmann, J. Riedler, C. Braun-Fahrlander, C. Roduit, R. Lauener,
P. I. Pfefferle, J. Weber, and E. von Mutius. 2013. Atopic sensitization in the first year of
life. J Allergy Clin Immunol 131(3):781-788.
Dowhower Karpa, K., I. M. Paul, J. A. Leckie, S. Shung, N. Carkaci-Salli, K. E. Vrana, D.
Mauger, T. Fausnight, and J. Poger. 2012. A retrospective chart review to identify peri­
natal factors associated with food allergies. Nutr J 11:87.
Du Toit, G., G. Roberts, P. H. Sayre, H. T. Bahnson, S. Radulovic, A. F. Santos, H. A. Brough,
D. Phippard, M. Basting, M. Feeney, V. Turcanu, M. L. Sever, M. Gomez Lorenzo, M.
Plaut, and G. Lack. 2015. Randomized trial of peanut consumption in infants at risk for
peanut allergy. N Engl J Med 372(9):803-813.

538

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Du Toit, G., P. H. Sayre, G. Roberts, M. L. Sever, K. Lawson, H. T. Bahnson, H. A. Brough,
A. F. Santos, K. M. Harris, S. Radulovic, M. Basting, V. Turcanu, M. Plaut, G. Lack.
2016. Effect of avoidance on peanut allergy after early peanut consumption. N Engl J
Med 374:1435-1443.
Dunstan, J., C. West, S. McCarthy, J. Metcalfe, S. Meldrum, W. Oddy, M. Tulic, N. D’Vaz,
and S. Prescott. 2012. The relationship between maternal folate status in pregnancy,
cord blood folate levels, and allergic outcomes in early childhood. Allergy 67(1):50-57.
Fisher, H. R., G. du Toit, and G. Lack. 2011. Specific oral tolerance induction in food allergic
children: Is oral desensitisation more effective than allergen avoidance?: A meta-analysis
of published RCTs. Arch Dis Child 96(3):259-264.
Frazier, A. L., C. A. Camargo, Jr., S. Malspeis, W. C. Willett, and M. C. Young. 2014. Prospec­
tive study of peripregnancy consumption of peanuts or tree nuts by mothers and the risk
of peanut or tree nut allergy in their offspring. JAMA Pediatr 168(2):156-162.
Goldberg, M., E. Eisenberg, A. Elizur, N. Rajuan, M. Rachmiel, A. Cohen, G. Zadik-Mnuhin,
and Y. Katz. 2013. Role of parental atopy in cow’s milk allergy: A population-based
study. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 110(4):279-283.
Grimshaw, K. E., J. Maskell, E. M. Oliver, R. C. Morris, K. D. Foote, E. N. Mills, G. Roberts,
and B. M. Margetts. 2013. Introduction of complementary foods and the relationship to
food allergy. Pediatrics 132(6):e1529-e1538.
Grimshaw, K. E. C., J. Maskell, E. M. Oliver, R. C. G. Morris, K. D. Foote, E. N. C. Mills,
B. M. Margetts, and G. Roberts. 2014. Diet and food allergy development during in­
fancy: Birth cohort study findings using prospective food diary data. Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology 133(2):511-519.
Gunaratne, A. W., M. Makrides, and C. T. Collins. 2015. Maternal prenatal and/or postnatal
n-3 long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA) supplementation for preventing
allergies in early childhood. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD010085.
Ivakhnenko, O., and S. Nyankovskyy. 2013. Effect of the specific infant formula mixture of
oligosaccharides on local immunity and development of allergic and infectious disease in
young children: Randomized study. Pediatria Polska 88(5):398-404.
Jones, A. P., D. Palmer, G. Zhang, and S. L. Prescott. 2012. Cord blood 25-hydroxyvitamin
D3 and allergic disease during infancy. Pediatrics 130(5):e1128-e1135.
Katz, Y., N. Rajuan, M. R. Goldberg, E. Eisenberg, E. Heyman, A. Cohen, and M. Leshno.
2010. Early exposure to cow’s milk protein is protective against IgE-mediated cow’s milk
protein allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 126(1):77-82.
Klemens, C. M., D. R. Berman, and E. L. Mozurkewich. 2011. The effect of perinatal omega-3
fatty acid supplementation on inflammatory markers and allergic diseases: A systematic
review. BJOG 118(8):916-925.
Kong, X. Y., Y. Yang, J. Guan, and R. Z. Wang. 2014. Probiotics’ preventive effect on pe­
diatric food allergy: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Chin Med Sci J
29(3):144-147.
Koplin, J. J., S. C. Dharmage, A. L. Ponsonby, M. L. Tang, A. J. Lowe, L. C. Gurrin, N. J.
Osborne, P. E. Martin, M. N. Robinson, M. Wake, D. J. Hill, and K. J. Allen. 2012.
Environmental and demographic risk factors for egg allergy in a population-based study
of infants. Allergy 67(11):1415-1422.
Koplin, J. J., N. H. Suaini, P. Vuillermin, J. A. Ellis, M. Panjari, A. L. Ponsonby, R. L. Peters,
M. C. Matheson, D. Martino, T. Dang, N. J. Osborne, P. Martin, A. Lowe, L. C. Gurrin,
M. L. Tang, M. Wake, T. Dwyer, J. Hopper, S. C. Dharmage, K. J. Allen. 2016. Poly­
morphisms affecting vitamin D-binding protein modify the relationship between serum
vitamin D (25[OH]D3) and food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(2):500-506.
Kramer, M. S., and R. Kakuma. 2004. The optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding: A
systematic review. Adv Exp Med Biol 554:63-77.

APPENDIX C

539

Kramer, M. S., and R. Kakuma. 2012. Maternal dietary antigen avoidance during pregnancy
or lactation, or both, for preventing or treating atopic disease in the child. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 9:CD000133.
Liao, S. L., S. H. Lai, K. W. Yeh, Y. L. Huang, T. C. Yao, M. H. Tsai, M. C. Hua, and J. L.
Huang. 2014. Exclusive breastfeeding is associated with reduced cow’s milk sensitization
in early childhood. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 25(5):456-461.
Liu, X., G. Wang, X. Hong, D. Wang, H. J. Tsai, S. Zhang, L. Arguelles, R. Kumar, H. Wang,
R. Liu, Y. Zhou, C. Pearson, K. Ortiz, R. Schleimer, P. G. Holt, J. Pongracic, H. E. Price,
C. Langman, and X. Wang. 2011. Gene-vitamin D interactions on food sensitization: A
prospective birth cohort study. Allergy 66(11):1442-1448.
Liu, X., L. Arguelles, Y. Zhou, G. Wang, Q. Chen, H. J. Tsai, X. Hong, R. Liu, H. E. Price,
C. Pearson, S. Apollon, N. Cruz, R. Schleimer, C. B. Langman, J. A. Pongracic, and X.
Wang. 2013. Longitudinal trajectory of vitamin D status from birth to early childhood
in the development of food sensitization. Pediatr Res 74(3):321-326.
Loo, E. X., G. V. Llanora, Q. Lu, M. M. Aw, B. W. Lee, and L. P. Shek. 2014. Supplementation
with probiotics in the first 6 months of life did not protect against eczema and allergy
in at-risk Asian infants: A 5-year follow-up. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 163(1):25-28.
Lowe, A. J., C. S. Hosking, C. M. Bennett, K. J. Allen, C. Axelrad, J. B. Carlin, M. J.
Abramson, S. C. Dharmage, and D. J. Hill. 2011. Effect of a partially hydrolyzed whey
infant formula at weaning on risk of allergic disease in high-risk children: A randomized
controlled trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 128(2):360-365.
Luccioli, S., Y. Zhang, L. Verrill, M. Ramos-Valle, and E. Kwegyir-Afful. 2014. Infant feeding
practices and reported food allergies at 6 years of age. Pediatrics 134(Suppl 1):S21-S28.
Magdelijns, F. J., M. Mommers, J. Penders, L. Smits, and C. Thijs. 2011. Folic acid use in
pregnancy and the development of atopy, asthma, and lung function in childhood. Pe­
diatrics 128(1):e135-e144.
Mailhol, C., F. Giordano-Labadie, V. Lauwers-Cances, A. Ammoury, C. Paul, and F. Rance.
2014. Point prevalence and risk factors for food allergy in a cohort of 386 children with
atopic dermatitis attending a multidisciplinary dermatology/paediatric allergy clinic. Eur
J Dermatol 24(1):63-69.
Marrs, T., K. D. Bruce, K. Logan, D. W. Rivett, M. R. Perkin, G. Lack, and C. Flohr. 2013. Is
there an association between microbial exposure and food allergy? A systematic review.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 24(4):311-320.
Martin, P. E., J. K. Eckert, J. J. Koplin, A. J. Lowe, L. C. Gurrin, S. C. Dharmage, P.
Vuillermin, M. L. Tang, A. L. Ponsonby, M. Matheson, D. J. Hill, and K. J. Allen. 2015.
Which infants with eczema are at risk of food allergy? Results from a population-based
cohort. Clin Exp Allergy 45(1):255-264.
McGowan, E. C., G. R. Bloomberg, P. J. Gergen, C. M. Visness, K. F. Jaffee, M. Sandel, G.
O’Connor, M. Kattan, J. Gern, and R. A. Wood. 2015. Influence of early-life exposures
on food sensitization and food allergy in an inner-city birth cohort. J Allergy Clin Im­
munol 135(1):171-178.
Metsala, J., A. Lundqvist, L. J. Virta, M. Kaila, M. Gissler, and S. M. Virtanen. 2013.
Mother’s and offspring’s use of antibiotics and infant allergy to cow’s milk. Epidemiol­
ogy 24(2):303-309.
Newberry, S. J., M. Chung, M. Booth, M. A. Maglione, A. M. Tang, C. E. O’Hanlon, D. D.
Wang, A. Okunogbe, C. Huang, A. Motala, M. Timmer, W. Dudley, R. Shanman,
T. R. Coker, and P. G. Shekelle. 2016. Omega-3 fatty acids and maternal and child
health: An updated systematic review. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 224.
AHRQ Publication No. 16-E003-EF. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality.

540

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Norizoe, C., N. Akiyama, T. Segawa, H. Tachimoto, H. Mezawa, H. Ida, and M. Urashima.
2014. Increased food allergy and vitamin D: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-con­
trolled trial. Pediatr Int 56(1):6-12.
Okupa, A. Y., R. F. Lemanske, Jr., D. J. Jackson, M. D. Evans, R. A. Wood, and E. C. Matsui.
2013. Early-life folate levels are associated with incident allergic sensitization. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 131(1):226-228.
Osborn, D. A., and J. Sinn. 2006. Formulas containing hydrolysed protein for prevention
of allergy and food intolerance in infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev(4):CD003664.
Palmer, D. J., J. Metcalfe, M. Makrides, M. S. Gold, P. Quinn, C. E. West, R. Loh, and S. L.
Prescott. 2013. Early regular egg exposure in infants with eczema: A randomized con­
trolled trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 132(2):387-392.
Pele, F., E. Bajeux, H. Gendron, C. Monfort, F. Rouget, L. Multigner, J. F. Viel, and S. Cordier.
2013. Maternal fish and shellfish consumption and wheeze, eczema and food allergy at
age two: A prospective cohort study in Brittany, France. Environ Health 12:102.
Perkin, M. R., K. Logan, A. Tseng, B. Raji, S. Ayis, J. Peacock, H. Brough, T. Marrs, S.
Radulovic, J. Craven, C. Flohr, G. Lack, and EAT Study Team. 2016. Randomized trial of
introduction of allergenic foods in breast-fed infants. N Engl J Med 374(18):1733-1743.
Peters, R., K. Allen, S. Dharmage, C. Lodge, J. Koplin, A. Ponsonby, M. Wake, A. Lowe, M.
Tang, M. Matheson, and L. Gurrin. 2015. Differential factors associated with challengeproven food allergy phenotypes in a population cohort of infants: A latent class analysis.
Clin Exp Allergy 45(5):953-963.
Pyrhonen, K., S. Nayha, L. Hiltunen, and E. Laara. 2013. Caesarean section and allergic
manifestations: Insufficient evidence of association found in population-based study of
children aged 1 to 4 years. Acta Paediatr 102(10):982-989.
Roduit, C., R. Frei, M. Depner, B. Schaub, G. Loss, J. Genuneit, P. Pfefferle, A. Hyvarinen,
A. M. Karvonen, J. Riedler, J. C. Dalphin, J. Pekkanen, E. von Mutius, C. BraunFahrlander, and R. Lauener. 2014. Increased food diversity in the first year of life is
inversely associated with allergic diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 133(4):1056-1064.
Stelmach, I., M. Bobrowska-Korzeniowska, K. Smejda, P. Majak, J. Jerzynska, W. Stelmach, K.
Polanska, W. Sobala, J. Krysicka, and W. Hanke. 2014. Risk factors for the development
of atopic dermatitis and early wheeze. Allergy Asthma Proc 35(5):382-389.
von Berg, A., B. Filipiak-Pittroff, U. Kramer, B. Hoffmann, E. Link, C. Beckmann, U.
Hoffmann, D. Reinhardt, A. Grubl, J. Heinrich, H. E. Wichmann, C. P. Bauer, S.
Koletzko, D. Berdel, and G. I. s. group. 2013. Allergies in high-risk schoolchildren after
early intervention with cow’s milk protein hydrolysates: 10-year results from the German
Infant Nutritional Intervention (GINI) study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 131(6):1565-1573.
Wawro, N., J. Heinrich, E. Thiering, J. Kratzsch, B. Schaaf, B. Hoffmann, I. Lehmann, C. P.
Bauer, S. Koletzko, A. von Berg, D. Berdel, and J. Linseisen. 2014. Serum 25(OH)D
concentrations and atopic diseases at age 10: Results from the GINIplus and LISAplus
birth cohort studies. BMC Pediatr 14:286.
Weisse, K., S. Winkler, F. Hirche, G. Herberth, D. Hinz, M. Bauer, S. Roder, U. RolleKampczyk, M. von Bergen, S. Olek, U. Sack, T. Richter, U. Diez, M. Borte, G. I. Stangl,
and I. Lehmann. 2013. Maternal and newborn vitamin D status and its impact on food
allergy development in the German LINA cohort study. Allergy 68(2):220-228.
West, C. E., J. Dunstan, S. McCarthy, J. Metcalfe, N. D’Vaz, S. Meldrum, W. H. Oddy, M.
K. Tulic, and S. L. Prescott. 2012. Associations between maternal antioxidant intakes in
pregnancy and infant allergic outcomes. Nutrients 4(11):1747-1758.
West, C. E., M. L. Hammarstrom, and O. Hernell. 2013. Probiotics in primary prevention of
allergic disease—follow-up at 8-9 years of age. Allergy 68(8):1015-1020.

Appendix D
Acronyms and Abbreviations

AAAAI
AAFA
AAP
ACAA
ACAAI
ACD
ACP
AD
ADA
ADA
aOR
AP
APC
APT
ASCIA

American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America
American Academy of Pediatrics
Air Carrier Access Act
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
allergic contact dermatitis
allergen control plan
atopic dermatitis
American Diabetes Association
Americans with Disabilities Act
adjusted odds ratio
allergenic proctocolitis
antigen-presenting cell
atopy patch test
Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy

BAT
BEAT

basophil activation test
Beating Egg Allergy Trial

CAC
CCP
CD14
CDC
CI
CPSC

Codex Alimentarius Commission
critical control point
cluster of differentiation 14
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
confidence interval
Consumer Product Safety Commission
541

542

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

CRD

component resolved diagnostics

DBPCOFC
DC
DMP
DOJ
DOT

double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenge
dendritic cell
differentially methylated probe
U.S. Department of Justice
U.S. Department of Transportation

EAACI
EAT
ECHO
ED
EFSA
EG
EHF
ELISA
EoE
EPIT
ESPGHAN

European Academy of Allergy & Clinical Immunology
Enquiring About Tolerance
Environmental Influences on Child Health Outcomes
eliciting dose
European Food Safety Authority
eosinophilic gastroenteritis
extensively hydrolyzed cow’s milk formula
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
eosinophilic esophagitis
epicutaneous immunotherapy
European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition
European Union
epigenome-wide association study

EU
EWAS

FDA
FDEIA
FNS
FPIES
FSIS
FSMA

Federal Aviation Administration
Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act
Food Allergy Management and Prevention Plans
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations
Food and Drug Administration
food-dependent, exercise-induced allergy
U.S. Food and Nutrition Service
food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome
Food Safety and Inspection Service
Food Safety Modernization Act

GI
GINI
GWAS
GxE

gastrointestinal
German Infant Nutritional Intervention
genome-wide association study
genome–environment

HACCP
HEAP

hazard analysis and critical control point
Hen’s Egg Allergy Prevention

FAA
FALCPA
FAMPP
FAO

543

APPENDIX D

HHS
HLA
HRQL

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
human leucocyte antigen
health-related quality of life

ICD
ICN
ICSA
IDEA
IEP
IFN
IgE
ILSI-EU
IOM
ITP

International Classification of Diseases
Institute of Child Nutrition
interval censoring survival analysis
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
individualized education program
interferon
immunoglobulin E
International Life Sciences Institute-Europe
Institute of Medicine
Interstate Travel Program

JCAAI

Joint Council of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology

LEAP
LOAEL

Learning Early About Peanut Allergy
lowest-observed-adverse-effect level

MAPK
MED
Mis-BAIR
MMR

mitogen-activated protein kinase
minimal eliciting done
Melbourne Infant Study-BCG for Allergy and Infection
Reduction
measles, mumps, rubella

NAS
NCHS
NEISS
NHAMCS
NHANES
NHDS
NHMRC
NIAID
NIH
NOAEL
NRC
NSAID

National Academy of Sciences
National Center for Health Statistics
National Electronic Injury Surveillance System
National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
National Hospital Discharge Survey
National Health and Medical Research Council
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
National Institutes of Health
no-observed-adverse-effect level
National Research Council
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug

OFC
OIT
OR

oral food challenge
oral immunotherapy
odds ratio

544

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

PAL
PASTURE
PCR
PFAS
PHF
PIFA

precautionary allergen labeling
Protection against Allergy Study in Rural Environments
polymerase chain reaction
pollen-associated food allergy syndrome
partially hydrolyzed formula
Prevalence of Infant Food Allergy; Pertussis
Immunisation and Food Allergy
PreventADALL Preventing Atopic Dermatitis and Allergies in Children
PRISMA
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-analyses
RAST
RCT
RFR
RR

radioallergosorbent test
randomized controlled trial
Reportable Food Registry
relative risk

sIgE
SLIT
SNP
SOP
SPT
STEP
SyMBIOTA

allergen-specific IgE (or food-specific IgE)
sublingual immunotherapy
single nucleotide polymorphism
standard operating procedure
skin prick test
Starting Time for Egg Protein
Synergy in Microbiota

TNO
TTB
TWG

Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research
U.S. Tax and Trade Bureau
Threshold Working Group

USDA

U.S. Department of Agriculture

VDR
VITAL®

vitamin D receptor
Voluntary Incidental Trace Allergen Labeling

WAO
WHO

World Allergy Organization
World Health Organization

Appendix E
Definitions

Acceptable level of risk: A risk management decision regarding the degree
of risk that would be acceptable within the affected population.
Allergen-specific IgE (sIgE): An IgE that recognizes a specific allergen and
that is formed by the immune systems of some individuals after they have
been exposed to that allergen in food. Also referred to in the text as foodspecific IgE.
Allergy/allergic disease: A disease caused by immunologic dysfunction that
falls under one of two key classifications: immunoglobin E (IgE)-mediated
or non-IgE-mediated.
Anaphylaxis: An acute, potentially life-threatening syndrome with multisystemic manifestations due to the rapid release of inflammatory mediators.
Atopic disorder: Disorder characterized by exaggerated or hypersensitive
immune reactions to foreign antigens.
Atopic march: Refers to the idea that atopic disorders progress over time
from eczema (i.e., atopic dermatitis) to asthma.
Atopy patch test (APT): A test performed in a manner similar to patch
testing that is routinely used for evaluation of allergic contact dermati­
tis, except that foods are used. The food, presented as a fresh extract or
powder, is generally placed under an aluminum disc on the skin for 48
545

546

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

hours then removed. The final test result is determined at 72 hours after
application. Current guidelines do not recommend the APT for the routine
diagnosis of food allergies.
Auto-injector of epinephrine: A device used in first-aid management to selfinject epinephrine.
Basophil activation test (BAT): A test conducted by exposing the basophils
in a test tube to various concentrations of the allergen to be tested, either
an extract or individual component proteins in the test tube. The readout
is the number of cells responding, or the concentration of allergen at which
50 percent of the cells respond. About 10 percent of people are BAT nonresponders, even though they are allergic and have positive skin tests. The
test is a functional assay akin to a provocation test, such as a skin prick test.
Basophils (basophilic granulocytes): The least abundant of the granulo­
cytes (the others being neutrophils and eosinophils). Basophils can release
histamine, lipid mediators, and cytokines in response to the aggregation of
their cells surface FceRI, which is induced when IgE bound to these FceRI
recognizes specific allergens, including those from foods. Unlike mast cells,
basophils mature in the bone marrow and circulate in the blood, but can
enter tissues at sites of allergic inflammation.
Component resolved diagnostics: A test sometimes referred to as molecular
testing. This test involves measuring sIgE against individual allergenic food
proteins.
Cross-contact: A situation in which an unintended allergen may be present
in an otherwise allergen-free food because of contact between the unsafe
and safe foods.
Cytokines: Small proteins produced by various immune cells and other
cell types that carry signals to facilitate communication and interaction
between cells.
Desensitization: A state of clinical and immunological nonresponsiveness
to an allergen, including food allergens, that can be induced by the careful,
physician-guided administration of gradually increasing amounts of the
offending allergen over a relatively short period of time (hours to days). The
maintenance of such desensitization typically requires continued regular
exposure to the offending allergen (also see Tolerance).

APPENDIX E

547

Epinephrine: Also known as adrenaline, first-line therapy for food-induced
anaphylaxis. Recommended to be injected intramuscularly.
Epitopes: Specific fragments of food allergens (antigens) that the immune
system recognizes; if recognized by IgE bound to FceRI on the surface of
mast cells and basophils, epitopes can trigger an allergic reaction that may
include anaphylaxis.
Exposure assessment: An action that plays an essential role in determining
whether the hazardous properties of a substance will translate to adverse
health effects. For foods, the exposure assessment estimates the amounts
(or range of amounts) of the hazard that are likely to be consumed. If these
amounts exceed a Reference Dose or the established maximum level in
foods (established using a hazard assessment), then a risk of adverse health
consequences to the exposed (sub)population is predicted. In contrast, an
exposure at or below the Reference Dose or maximum level in foods is
assumed to be safe for the vast majority of individuals. In the case of food
allergens, the Reference Dose could also be used as an action level to deter­
mine when precautionary allergen labeling should be applied to a product
package. (Also see Hazard identification and hazard characterization and
Reference Dose.)
FceRI: The high-affinity receptor for IgE that binds IgE and thereby permits
cells bearing FceRI on their surface (e.g., mast cells, basophils, some den­
dritic cells, and macrophages) to become “sensitized” so that they can be
activated to release inflammatory mediators by allergens recognized by the
bound IgE. For the FceRI to initiate the cell signaling that results in activa­
tion of mast cells and basophils to release their mediators requires that the
receptors are aggregated when their bound IgE reacts with allergens that are
at least bivalent (e.g., have two epitopes that can bind IgE). This permits
such allergens to bridge adjacent IgE molecules and to aggregate the FceRI
receptors that bind such IgE.
Food: Any substance—whether processed, semiprocessed, or raw—that is
intended for human consumption. Food includes drinks, chewing gum, food
additives, and dietary supplements.
Food allergens: The components within foods that trigger adverse immuno­
logic reactions; these are most often specific glycoproteins that can interact
with the body’s immune cells in a way that initiates the development of a
food allergy.

548

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Food allergy: An adverse health effect arising from a specific immune
response that occurs reproducibly on exposure to a given food, and that
can be either IgE-mediated or non-IgE-mediated.
Food intolerance: An adverse reaction to foods or food components that
lacks an identified immunologic pathophysiology.
Food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome and food protein-induced
allergic proctocolitis: Non-IgE-mediated disorders that lack current means
of simple laboratory testing to identify causal foods or to confirm the
diagnosis. Guidelines suggest using the medical history, resolution of signs
and symptoms during dietary elimination, and recurrence of signs and
symptoms upon exposure, for example during an oral food challenge, as a
means of diagnosis.
Hazard: An inherent property of an agent or situation having the potential
to cause adverse effects when an organism, system, or given population is
exposed to that agent.
Hazard identification and hazard characterization: The two components of
the hazard assessment process. Hazard identification includes a determina­
tion that the substance with the hazardous properties is present, but also
more generally refers to the identification of the type and nature of the
adverse effects that an agent can cause in an organism, system, or given
population. In the hazard identification of an allergenic food, the preva­
lence and severity of the specific food allergy would be considered. Hazard
characterization involves a qualitative and, wherever possible, quantitative
description of the inherent property of an agent or situation having the
potential to cause adverse effects. Hazard characterization encompasses the
dose–response relationship. A hazard assessment (involving both hazard
identification and hazard characterization) can be used to derive safe levels
of exposure, for instance through the elaboration of a Reference Dose.
Immunoglobulin E (IgE): An antibody that can trigger intense inflammatory
reactions. IgE causes the IgE-mediated allergic response by binding strongly
to IgE receptors (FceRI) found on the surface of mast cells and basophils,
and triggering these cells to release powerful inflammatory mediators once
the cell-bound IgE recognizes the offending food allergen.
Lowest-observed-adverse-effect level (LOAEL): The lowest dose of a haz­
ard (e.g., allergen, expressed as milligrams (mg) of total protein from the
allergenic food) that can provoke an observable reaction in an individual
or population. Also known as the minimal eliciting dose.

APPENDIX E

549

Mast cells: Cells derived from hematopoietic precursors that mature after
migrating into essentially all vascularized tissues, where they can reside for
long periods of time. Mast cells are present within the mucosal tissues of
the entire gastroinstestinal tract (and many other anatomical sites, including
the skin and airways) and contain cytoplasmic granules rich in histamine,
proteoglycans (depending on the mast cell population, these consist of
heparin and/or chondroitin sulfates), serine proteases (depending on the
mast cell population, these can consist of carboxypeptidase A3, tryptases
and/or chymase). Upon activation by IgE and specific antigens (including
food allergens), mast cells can release such granule-associated inflammatory
mediators and also secrete newly synthesized lipid mediators and cytokines.
Mast cells also can be activated by diverse agents that act independently of
IgE, which can result in the release of the same products produced by mast
cells activated through IgE.
No-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) or threshold: The highest dose
of a hazard (e.g., allergen, expressed as mg of total protein from the aller­
genic food) that will not provoke an observable reaction in an individual
or population.
Objective response: A reaction that can be independently verified by a clini­
cally trained observer (e.g., urticaria [hives], vomiting, flushing, angioedema).
Oral food challenge (OFC): A feeding test that typically involves a gradual,
medically supervised ingestion of increasingly larger doses of the food being
tested as a possible food allergen. Guidelines recommend using the OFC to
diagnose food allergy, particularly in individuals whose clinical history and
other test results do not definitively establish the diagnosis of food allergy.
There are three types of OFCs depending on the protocol. An open OFC is
one where the food is in its natural form; a single-blind OFC is one where
the food is masked from the patient’s perspective so less patient bias occurs
because of anxiety; a double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenge
(DBPCOFC) involves masking the tested allergen and feeding it or indis­
tinguishable placebo randomly without the patient or observer knowing if
the allergen or placebo is being tested. A DBPCOFC is considered the “gold
standard” for diagnosis of food allergy.
Pollen-associated food allergy syndrome (oral allergy syndrome): A type of
food allergy with signs and symptoms that include itching or swelling of the
lips, mouth, or throat in response to eating certain raw fruits and vegetables
that typically develops in adults with hay fever. The specific IgE antibodies
formed exhibit reactivity with both proteins found in pollens and similar
proteins found in certain fruits and vegetables.

550

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Reference Dose: The lowest dose of a hazard (e.g., allergen, expressed in
mg of total protein from the allergenic source) that is predicted to elicit
symptoms of a reaction when ingested by a defined, small percentage of the
population of individuals who are known to experience adverse reactions
to that hazard.
Risk: The probability of an adverse effect in an organism, system, or (sub)
population caused under specified circumstances by exposure to an agent.
Risk characterization: A process that can be used to assess the likelihood of
risk even in cases where a Reference Dose or maximum level has not been
established. The risk characterization is the determination of quantitative
probability, including attendant uncertainties, that adverse health effects
will occur in a given individual or (sub)population, under defined condi­
tions of exposure.
Safety: The control of recognized hazards to achieve an acceptable level
of risk.
Sensitization: A condition in which an individual produces detectable IgE
to a particular allergen or allergens. It precedes and is required for the cell
manifestations of a food allergy, but not all individuals with detectable IgE
will experience a food allergy reaction to the allergen recognized by that
IgE.
Skin prick test: An allergy detection test performed by puncturing the
surface of the skin to introduce an allergen and evaluating the area of the
induced wheal (small swelling) and flare (redness) responses that can be
measured.
Subjective response: A mild transitory reaction that cannot be indepen­
dently confirmed by a clinically trained observer (e.g., palatal itching or
stomach cramping).
T cells: Lymphocytes produced by the thymus that guide many aspects of
the immune system, particularly its adaptability and ability to recognize
threats.
Tolerance: A state of relatively unresponsiveness of the immune system to
substances or tissue that have the capacity to elicit an immune response.
It can be natural (e.g., to the body’s own proteins) or acquired (e.g., to

APPENDIX E

551

external proteins). It also is said that some persons can “grow out” of an
allergy; this can be envisioned as a form of acquired tolerance to the offend­
ing allergen(s). In some instances, the state of tolerance may be transient
(also see Desensitization); in others it can be durable.

Appendix F
Committee Members
Biographical Sketches

Virginia A. Stallings, M.D. (Chair) is the Jean A. Cortner Endowed Chair
in Gastroenterology, and Director of the Nutrition Center at The Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, and Professor of Pediatrics at the Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania. Her research interests include
pediatric nutrition, evaluation of dietary intake and energy expenditure,
and nutrition-related chronic disease. Dr. Stallings has been a member of
the National Academy of Medicine since 2005 and has served on several
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine committees:
Committee on Nutrition Standards for National School Lunch and Break­
fast Programs, Committee on Nutrition Services for Medicare Beneficiaries,
Committee on the Scientific Basis for Dietary Risk Eligibility Criteria for
WIC (Women, Infants, and Children) Programs, the Committee to Review
the WIC Food Packages, and the Committee to Review Child and Adult
Care Food Program Meal Requirements. She is a former member (1997­
2000) and co-vice chair (2000-2002) of the Food and Nutrition Board. Dr.
Stallings is board certified in pediatrics and clinical nutrition. She received
the Fomon Nutrition Award from the American Academy of Pediatrics
and is a Fellow of the American Society of Nutrition. Dr. Stallings earned
a B.S. in Nutrition and Foods from Auburn University, an M.S. in Human
Nutrition and Biochemistry from Cornell University, and an M.D. from the
University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine.
Katrina (Katie) Allen, Ph.D., is Director of the Population Health Research
Theme, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Professor of Paediatrics
at the University of Melbourne, Australia, and holds a Chair in Food
553

554

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Allergy at the University of Manchester, United Kingdom. She is an active
pediatric allergist and gastroenterologist at the Royal Children’s Hospital,
Melbourne. Her research focuses on the evolving field of food allergy and
her vision is to prevent food allergy in children. She is a National Health
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Practitioner Fellow and Chief
Investigator on five NHMRC-funded studies, which seek to answer ques­
tions about population health and evolution of the allergy epidemic, includ­
ing gene-environment and epigenetic associations with food allergy. Dr.
Allen also is Director of the NHMRC-funded Australian Centre of Food
& Allergy Research, which aims to translate research findings into clinical
practice and public health policy to ensure the best outcomes for children
with food allergy.
A. Wesley Burks, M.D., is Executive Dean for the University of North Car­
olina (UNC) School of Medicine. In this role he provides overall academic
leadership for the School of Medicine and the UNC Health Care System.
He also is the Curnen Distinguished Professor in Pediatrics. Dr. Burks
joined the UNC system in November 2011. His research interests are in the
allergic diseases, particularly adverse reactions to foods. Dr. Burks heads a
research team whose work centers on identifying the allergens in specific
foods at a molecular level, improving understanding of the mechanism of
adverse food reactions, and developing treatments for food allergy in animal
models and in clinical studies. Dr. Burks and his colleagues are currently
conducting clinical studies with different types of mucosal immunotherapy.
His laboratory funding comes from many sources, including the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and private foundations. He is a past Chair and
member of the NIH Hypersensitivity, Autoimmune, and Immune-mediated
Diseases study section and is Past President of the American Academy of
Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. He received an M.D. from the University
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences and completed a fellowship in Allergy and
Immunology at Duke University Medical Center.
Nancy R. Cook, Sc.D., is a Professor in the Department of Medicine at the
Brigham & Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and Professor
of Epidemiology at the Harvard School of Public Health. Dr. Cook is a
biostatistician involved in the design, conduct, and analysis of several large
randomized trials, including the Women’s Health Study, the Physicians’
Health Study, and the VITamin D and OmegA-3 TriaL (VITAL). She leads
the Trials of Hypertension Prevention (TOHP) Follow-up Study, an obser­
vational follow-up of participants in Phases I and II of TOHP. Dr. Cook’s
methodologic efforts focus on the predictive modeling of observational data
and developing risk prediction scores using clinical biomarkers. She was a
member of the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s

APPENDIX F

555

Committee on the Consequences of Sodium Reduction in Populations. She
received her M.S. and Sc.D. from the Harvard School of Public Health.
Sharon M. Donovan, Ph.D., R.D., is Professor and Melissa M. Noel
Endowed Chair in the Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Her research focuses on
pediatric nutrition, with an emphasis on optimization of neonatal intestinal
development. She compares the biological effects of human milk and infant
formulas on intestinal function in human infants and neonatal piglets and
in various models of intestinal disease. Dr. Donovan is actively involved in
several professional societies and served as the President of the American
Society for Nutrition (2011-2012). She is the recipient of several awards
in recognition of her research, including the Mead Johnson Award and the
Norman A. Kretchmer Award from the American Society for Nutrition. She
is currently a member of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine’s Food and Nutrition Board. Dr. Donovan received her B.S.
and Ph.D. in Nutrition from the University of California, Davis, and com­
pleted a post-doctoral fellowship in Pediatric Endocrinology at the Stanford
University School of Medicine.
Stephen J. Galli, M.D., was chair of the Department of Pathology (1999­
2016), and since 1999 has been the Mary Hewitt Loveless, M.D. Professor,
and Professor of Pathology and of Microbiology and Immunology at the
Stanford University School of Medicine. He also was the Co-Director of
the Stanford Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine from 2009­
2016. He served on the faculty of Harvard Medical School from 1979 to his
arrival at Stanford. Dr. Galli’s research has focused on the development and
function of mast cells and basophils and the development of new animal
models for studying the roles of these cells in health and disease, with par­
ticular interests in the roles of these cells in asthma, anaphylaxis, and food
allergies, and the roles of mast cells and IgE in innate and acquired host
defense against venoms. He is currently principal investigator of a National
Institute of Allergy and Immune Diseases (NIAID) Asthma and Allergic Dis­
eases Cooperative Research Center (AADCRC) at Stanford (2013-2018),
for a project entitled “Integrated Genomic and Functional Studies of Toler­
ance Therapy for Peanut Allergy.” Dr. Galli served as one of two Co-Chairs
of an NIAID Food Allergy Research Expert Panel (2006) and is a member
of the National Allergy and Infectious Diseases Council of the NIH (2014­
2018). Dr. Galli was a member of the National Research Council committee
that wrote the report Toward Precision Medicine: Building a Knowledge
Network for Biomedical Research and a New Taxonomy of Disease. Dr.
Galli was elected to the Collegium Internationale Allergologicum (serving
as president from 2010-2014) and the National Academy of Medicine. He

556

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

also is a foreign member of the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (National
Academy of the Lynxes) in Rome. Dr. Galli received a MERIT Award from
the NIAID/NIH (1995), Scientific Achievement Awards from the Interna­
tional Association of Allergy & Clinical Immunology (1997) and the World
Allergy Organization (2011), the Rous-Whipple Award of the American
Society for Investigative Pathology (2014), and the Karl Landsteiner Medal
of the Austrian Society of Allergology and Immunology (2014). Dr. Galli
received an M.D. from Harvard Medical School, and completed a residency
in Anatomic Pathology at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Bernard Guyer, M.D., M.P.H., is the Zanvyl Krieger Professor of Chil­
dren’s Health, Emeritus, at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health in Baltimore. A physician trained in both pediatrics and preventive
medicine, Dr. Guyer’s 40-year career in public health has been devoted to
advancing the health of mothers, children, and families worldwide. Retired
in 2011, he continues to be actively involved in the Women’s and Children’s
Health Policy Center at the Bloomberg School of Public Health, where he
lectures, teaches, and advises students and faculty. He is a member of the
National Academy of Medicine and chaired the National Academy of Sci­
ences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Board on Children, Youth, and Families
(2007-2013). Dr. Guyer received his B.S. from Antioch College, his M.D.
from the University of Rochester School of Medicine, and his M.P.H. from
the Harvard School of Public Health.
Gideon Lack, M.B.B.Ch., is Head of the Children’s Allergy Service at Guy’s
and St. Thomas’ National Health Service Foundation Trust, Professor of
Paediatric Allergy and Head of Department of Paediatric Allergy at King’s
College London. His research has focused on severe childhood asthma,
peanut allergy, and new strategies to prevent and treat food allergies,
eczema, asthma, and hay fever in children and adults. His clinical expertise
includes allergic asthma, anaphylaxis, and desensitizing vaccines to treat
hay fever and other allergies. Dr. Lack is principal investigator of a current
randomized controlled clinical trial designed to determine the best strategy
to prevent peanut allergy in young children, the LEAP-On (Learning Early
About Peanut Allergy) study and principal investigator of the EAT (Enquir­
ing About Tolerance) study. He is a member of the British Medical Associa­
tion, the British Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, the European
Academy of Allergy & Clinical Immunology, the Medical Research Council
Asthma UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, and the Collegium
Internationale Allergolicum. He also is a Fellow of the Royal College of
Paediatrics and Child Health. Dr. Lack obtained his medical degree from
the University of Oxford Medical School and his specialization in Allergy

APPENDIX F

557

and Immunology from the National Jewish Centre for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine in Denver, Colorado.
Ann S. Masten, Ph.D., LP, is Regents Professor and Irving B. Harris Pro­
fessor of Child Development in the Institute of Child Development at the
University of Minnesota. Dr. Masten’s research focuses on understanding
processes that promote competence and prevent problems in human devel­
opment, with a focus on adaptive processes and pathways, developmental
tasks and cascades, and resilience in the context of high cumulative risk,
adversity, and trauma. She directs the Project Competence studies of risk
and resilience, including studies of normative populations and high-risk
young people exposed to war, natural disasters, poverty, homelessness, and
migration. Dr. Masten co-chairs the Forum on Investing in Young Children
Globally and serves on the Board of Children, Youth, and Families for the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. She is a mem­
ber of the U.S. National Committee of Psychology, a past-president of the
Society for Research in Child Development, and recipient of the Bronfen­
brenner Award for Lifetime Contributions to Developmental Psychology in
the Service of Science and Society from the American Psychological Associa­
tion. Her publications include the 2014 book Ordinary Magic: Resilience
in Development and numerous empirical articles. She completed her Ph.D.
in psychology at the University of Minnesota and her clinical psychology
internship at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Jose M. Ordovas, Ph.D., is Professor of Nutrition at the Friedman School
of Nutrition Science and Policy, Professor of Genetics at the Sackler School
of Graduate Biomedical Sciences at Tufts University and Senior Scientist
at the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Human Nutrition Research
Center on Aging at Tufts University in Boston, Massachusetts, where he
also is the Director of the Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory. He is a
Senior Collaborating Scientist at the Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares and Instituto Madrileño de Estudios Avanzados en Ali­
mentación (IMDEA), both in Madrid, Spain. Dr. Ordovas’s major research
interests focus on the genetic factors predisposing to cardiovascular disease
and obesity and their interaction with the environment and behavioral fac­
tors, with special emphasis on diet. Throughout his career, Dr. Ordovas
has received multiple honors for his scientific achievements, including the
USDA Secretary’s Award, the Centrum American Nutrition Society Award,
the Mary Swartz Award from the Dietetic Association, the Garry-Labbe
Award from the American Association for Clinical Chemistry, the Fran­
cisco Grande Memorial Lecture for Excellence in Nutrition Research, The
Rafael del Pino Foundation Lecture, the Turkish Genetics Society Award,
the Jaén Paraíso Interior and Asociación Española de Municipalidades del

558

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

Olivo (AEMO) awards for his contributions to the diffusion of the Mediter­
ranean diet and the olive oil, the Good Cholesterol award from Aviles and
the Danone Foundation Award for achievements in Nutrition Research, the
Gold Medal of the Spanish Society of Cardiology, and the Francisco Grande
Award from the Fundacion Dieta Mediterranea. He has been awarded an
honorary degree in Medicine from the University of Cordoba in Spain and
the title of Member of the Royal Academies of Sciences, Medicine, Nutri­
tion and Pharmacy, all of them in Spain. Dr. Ordovas serves on multiple
editorial boards and is active with multiple international peer review and
steering committees. He served on the National Academy of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine’s Food and Nutrition Board (2005-2011). Dr.
Ordovas was educated in Spain at the University of Zaragoza where he
completed his undergraduate work in chemistry and received his doctorate
in human lipoprotein metabolism. He did postdoctoral work at the Mas­
sachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard, and Tufts.
Hugh A. Sampson, M.D., is the Kurt Hirschhorn, M.D. and Children’s
Center Foundation Professor of Pediatrics and the Director of the Jaffe
Food Allergy Institute at Mount Sinai’s Icahn School of Medicine. Dr.
Sampson’s research interests have focused on food allergic disorders, and
now include work on the pathogenesis of food-induced anaphylaxis, char­
acterization of allergenic food proteins and their processing by the immune
system, genetics of food allergy, development of novel diagnostic tests, and
mechanisms of immunotherapeutic strategies for treating food allergies,
including basic studies and clinical trials in oral, sublingual, and epicuta­
neous immunotherapy and the potential use of biologics, such as anti-IgE
and anti-cytokine monoclonal antibodies. Dr. Sampson is past chair of the
Section on Allergy & Immunology of the American Academy of Pediatrics
and the past-president of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &
Immunology. He has served on several editorial boards, including 20 years
on the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, and as Chair of the
Medical Advisory Board for Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Network/Food
Allergy Research and Education for 25 years. He also has served as a Direc­
tor of the American Board of Allergy and Immunology. Dr. Sampson is a
member of the National Academy of Medicine. He received his M.D. from
the University at Buffalo, the State University of New York.
Scott H. Sicherer, M.D., is the Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Professor of Allergy,
Immunology and Pediatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
Chief of the Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, and Medical
Director of Mount Sinai’s Clinical Research Unit. His research interests
include the following aspects of food allergy: natural history, gastrointes­
tinal manifestations, epidemiology, psychosocial and quality of life issues,

APPENDIX F

559

modalities to educate physicians and parents, and treatment modalities
(including novel therapies). He is a co-author of three Practice Parameters
(two on food allergy and one on diagnostic testing), and participated as
a member of the Coordinating Committee for the NIAID/NIH-supported
food allergy Guidelines. He is also a co-author of four American Academy
of Pediatrics (AAP) Clinical Reports covering allergy prevention, diagnos­
tics, use of epinephrine for anaphylaxis, and school issues for management
of food allergy. Dr. Sicherer was the AAP representative for drafting the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s guidelines for managing food
allergies in schools. He is past chair of the Adverse Reactions to Foods
Committee of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology,
the board of directors of the American Board of Allergy and Immunology,
and the Section on Allergy and Immunology of the AAP. He is associate
editor of The Journal of Allergy and Immunology, In Practice. Dr. Sicherer
received his M.D. from the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
and his pediatric training, including a chief residency, at Mount Sinai in
New York City. He completed a fellowship in allergy and immunology at
Johns Hopkins.
Anna Maria Siega-Riz, Ph.D., was the Associate Dean for Academic Affairs
and Professor in the Departments of Epidemiology and Nutrition at the
Gillings School of Global Public Health, the University of North Carolina
(UNC) at Chapel Hill at the start of this report. She is now a Professor in
the Departments of Public Health Sciences and Obstetrics and Gynecol­
ogy at the University of Virginia School of Medicine. She has focused her
research on maternal nutritional status, including maternal obesity and ges­
tational weight gain and their effect on the short- and long-term outcomes
of the mother and child. She studies dietary patterns among Hispanic adults
and children. She was a member of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advi­
sory Committee and has served on multiple committees for the National
Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, examining topics from
the WIC (Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants,
and Children) food packages to standards for systematic reviews in health
care. She currently serves on the advisory council of the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute and on the USDA working group preparing for
the Dietary Guidance during pregnancy for the 2020 report. Dr. Siega-Riz
earned a B.S. in Public Health in Nutrition from the UNC Gillings School
of Global Public Health, an M.S. in Food, Nutrition, and Food Service
Management from UNC–Greensboro, and a Ph.D. in Nutrition (Minor
in Epidemiology) from the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health.
Stephen L. Taylor, Ph.D., is Co-Founder and Co-Director of the Food
Allergy Research and Resource Program, and Professor in the Department

560

FINDING A PATH TO SAFETY IN FOOD ALLERGY

of Food Science and Technology at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln. His
research interests involve food allergies and allergy-like illnesses, including
the development, evaluation, and improvement of immunochemical meth­
ods for the detection of allergens and allergenic foods; the determination of
threshold doses for allergenic foods and implementation of risk assessment
approaches for allergenic foods; and the effect of food processing on food
allergens. Dr. Taylor has served on several committees and was a member
of the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Food
and Nutrition Board (1999-2004). He received his B.S. and M.S. in Food
Science and Technology from Oregon State University and his Ph.D. in
Biochemistry from the University of California, Davis.
Xiaobin Wang, M.D., M.P.H., Sc.D., is Zanvyl Krieger Professor in Child
Health, Director of the Center on the Early Life Origins of Disease, and
Professor of Pediatrics at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Pub­
lic Health and School of Medicine. In the past 16 years, Dr. Wang has
served as the principal investigator in a number of large scale molecular
epidemiological studies funded by NIH. She has led a multi-institution,
multidisciplinary team to investigate environmental, nutritional, genetic
and epigenetic factors during critical developmental windows (preconcep­
tion, in utero, infancy, and childhood) aiming to elucidate the root causes
of high-impact pediatric and adult diseases, including adverse reproductive
and pregnancy outcomes, obesity/diabetes/metabolic syndrome, and food
allergies. In particular, her team has conducted a series of innovative stud­
ies on food allergies and related traits or conditions in three unique study
cohorts (the Boston Birth Cohort, Chicago Family Cohort, and Chinese
Twin Cohort) and contributed to an improved understanding of the role of
genetics, gene–environment interactions, and epigenetics in the development
of food allergies. Dr. Wang previously served as a member of the Institute
of Medicine Committee on Understanding Premature Birth and Assuring
Healthy Outcomes. Dr. Wang received her M.D. from Peking University
(formerly, Beijing Medical University) in Beijing, China, and M.P.H. from
the School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine at Tulane University
in New Orleans. She also received an Sc.D. degree from the Department
of Maternal and Child Health at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health in Baltimore. She completed a 3-year research fellowship in
Environmental Epidemiology at the Harvard School of Public Health and
a residency in pediatrics at the Boston University Medical Center.

